
@node Compiler Overview
@chapter Compiler Overview
@cindex Compiler Overview


The structure of the compiler may be broadly characterized by
describing the compilation phases and the data structures that they
manipulate. The steps in the compilation are called phases rather
than passes since they don't necessarily involve a full pass over the
code. The data structure used to represent the code at some point is
called an @dfn{Intermediate representation} (IR).
@cindex IR
@cindex intermediate representation


Two major intermediate representations are used in the compiler:

@itemize @bullet{}

@item The  @dfn{implicit continuation representation} (ICR) represents
the lisp-level semantics of the source code during the initial phases.
Partial evaluation and semantic analysis are done on this
representation. ICR is roughly equivalent to a subset of Common Lisp,
but is represented as a flow-graph rather than a syntax tree. Phases
which only manipulate ICR comprise the ``front end''. It would be
possible to use a different back end such as one that directly
generated code for a stack machine.
@cindex ICR

@item The @dfn{virtual machine representation} (VMR) represents the
implementation of the source code on a virtual machine. The virtual
machine may vary depending on the the target hardware, but VMR is
sufficiently stylized that most of the phases which manipulate it are
portable.
@cindex VMR

@end itemize

Each phase is briefly described here. The phases from @dfn{local call
analysis} to @dfn{constraint propagation} all interact; for maximum
optimization, they are generally repeated until nothing new is
discovered. The source files which primarily contain each phase are
listed after ``Files: ''.

@table @dfn

@item ICR conversion
Convert the source into ICR, doing macroexpansion and simple
source-to-source transformation. All names are resolved at this time,
so we don't have to worry about name conflicts later on. Files:
@table @file
@item ir1opt.lisp
@item ir1report.lisp
@item ir1tran-lambda.lisp
@item ir1tran.lisp
@item ir1-translators.lisp
@item ir1util.lisp
@item srctran.lisp
@item typetran.lisp
@end table

@item Local call analysis
Find calls to local functions and convert them to local calls to the
correct entry point, doing keyword parsing, etc. Recognize once-called
functions as lets. Create @dfn{ external entry points} for entry-point
functions. Files: @file{locall.lisp}
@cindex {local call analysis}

@item Find components
Find flow graph components and compute depth-first ordering. Separate
top-level code from run-time code, and determine which components are
top-level components. Files: @file{dfo.lisp}
@cindex find components

@item ICR optimize
A grab-bag of all the non-flow ICR optimizations. Fold constant
functions, propagate types and eliminate code that computes unused
values. Special-case calls to some known global functions by replacing
them with a computed function. Merge blocks and eliminate
IF-IFs. Substitute let variables. Files:

@table @file
@item ir1opt.lisp
@item ir1tran.lisp
@item typetran.lisp
@item seqtran.lisp
@item generic/vm-tran.lisp
@end table

@item Type constraint propagation
Use global flow analysis to propagate information about lexical
variable types. Eliminate unnecessary type checks and tests. Files:
@file{constraint.lisp}
@cindex type constraint propagation

@item Type check generation
Emit explicit ICR code for any necessary type checks that are too
complex to be easily generated on the fly by the back end. Files:
@file{checkgen.lisp}

@item Event driven operations
Various parts of ICR are incrementally recomputed, either eagerly on
modification of the ICR, or lazily, when the relevant information is
needed.

@itemize
@item Check that type assertions are satisfied, marking places where type
checks need to be done.

@item Locate let calls.

@item Delete functions and variables with no references
@end itemize

Files: @file{ir1util.lisp}, @file{ir1opt.lisp}

@item ICR finalize
This phase is run after all components have been compiled. It scans
the global variable references, looking for references to undefined
variables and incompatible function redefinitions. Files:
@file{ir1final.lisp}, @file{main.lisp}.

@item Environment analysis
Determine which distinct environments need to be allocated, and what
context needed to be closed over by each environment. We detect
non-local exits and set closure variables. We also emit cleanup code
as funny function calls. This is the last pure ICR pass. Files:
@file{envanal.lisp}

@item Global TN allocation (GTN)
Iterate over all defined functions, determining calling conventions
and assigning TNs to local variables. Files: @file{gtn.lisp}
@cindex GTN


@item Local TN allocation (LTN)
Use type and policy information to determine which VMR translation to
use for known functions, and then create TNs for expression evaluation
temporaries. We also accumulate some random information needed by VMR
conversion. Files: @file{ltn.lisp}
@cindex LTN

@item Control analysis
Linearize the flow graph in a way that minimizes the number of
branches. The block-level structure of the flow graph is basically
frozen at this point. Files: @file{control}
@cindex control analysis


@item Stack analysis
Maintain stack discipline for unknown-values continuation in the
presence of local exits. Files: @file{stack.lisp}
@cindex stack analysis

@item Entry analysis
Collect some back-end information for each externally callable
function.
@cindex entry analysis

@item VMR conversion
Convert ICR into VMR by translating nodes into VOPs. Emit type
checks. Files: @file{ir2tran.lisp}, @file{vmdef.lisp}

@item Copy propagation
Use flow analysis to eliminate unnecessary copying of TN
values. Files: @file{copyprop.lisp}
@cindex copy propagation

@item Representation selection
Look at all references to each TN to determine which representation
has the lowest cost. Emit appropriate move and coerce VOPs for that
representation.
@cindex representation selection

@item Lifetime analysis
Do flow analysis to find the set of TNs whose lifetimes overlap with
the lifetimes of each TN being packed. Annotate call VOPs with the TNs
that need to be saved. Files: @file{life.lisp}
@cindex lifetime analysis

@item Pack
Find a legal register allocation, attempting to minimize unnecessary
moves. Files: @file{pack.lisp}
@cindex pack

@item Code generation
Call the VOP generators to emit assembly code. Files:
@file{codegen.lisp}
@cindex code generation

@item Pipeline reorganization
On some machines, move memory references backward in the code so that
they can overlap with computation. On machines with delayed branch
instructions, locate instructions that can be moved into delay
slots. Files: @file{assem-opt}
@cindex pipeline reorganization

@item Assembly
Resolve branches and convert into object code and fixup information.
Files: @file{assembler.lisp}
@cindex assembly

@item Dumping
Convert the compiled code into an object file or in-core
function. Files: @file{debug-dump.lisp}, @file{dump.lisp},
@file{generic/core.lisp}
@cindex dumping

@end table


@unnumbered The Implicit Continuation Representation
@cindex implicit continuation representation

The set of special forms recognized is exactly that specified in the
Common Lisp manual. Everything that is described as a macro in CLTL is
a macro. (EEK: can we say the same about the ANSI standard?)

Large amounts of syntactic information is thrown away by the
conversion to an anonymous flow graph representation. The elimination
of names eliminates the need to represent most environment
manipulation special forms. The explicit representation of control
eliminates the need to represent BLOCK and GO, and makes flow analysis
easy. The full Common Lisp LAMBDA is implemented with a simple
fixed-arg lambda, which greatly simplifies later code.
      
The elimination of syntactic information eliminates the need for most
of the @dfn{beta transformation} optimizations in Rabbit. There are no
PROGNs, no TAGBODYs and no RETURNs. There are no ``close parens''
which get in the way of determining which node receives a given value.

<Add reference for: Rabbit: A Compiler for Scheme)


In ICR, computation is represented by Nodes. These are the node types:

@table @dfn
@item if
Represents all conditionals.

@item set
Represents a @code{setq}.

@item ref
Represents a constant or variable reference.

@item combination
Represents a normal function call.

@item mv-combination
Represents a @code{multiple-value-call}. This is used to implement all
multiple value receiving forms except for @code{multiple-value-prog1},
which is implicit.

@item bind
This represents the allocation and initialization of the variables in
a lambda.

@item return
This collects the return value from a lambda and represents the
control transfer on return.

@item entry
Marks the start of a dynamic extent that can have non-local exits to
it. Dynamic state can be saved at this point for restoration on
re-entry.

@item exit
Marks a potentially non-local exit. This node is interposed between
the non-local uses of a continuation and the @dfn{dest} so that code
to do a non-local exit can be inserted if necessary.

@end table

Some slots are shared between all node types (via @dfn {defstruct}
inheritance.)  This information held in common between all nodes often
makes it possible to avoid special-casing nodes on the basis of
type. This shared information is primarily concerned with the order of
evaluation and destinations and properties of results. This control
and value flow is indicated in the node primarily by pointing to
continuations.

The @code{continuation} structure represents information sufficiently related
to the normal notion of a continuation that naming it so seems sensible.
Basically, a continuation represents a place in the code, or alternatively the
destination of an expression result and a transfer of control. These two
notions are bound together for the same reasons that they are related in the
standard functional continuation interpretation.

A continuation may be deprived of either or both of its value or
control significance. If the value of a continuation is unused due to
evaluation for effect, then the continuation will have a null
@dfn{dest}. If the @dfn{next} node for a continuation is deleted by
some optimization, then @dfn{next} will be @dfn{:none}.

  [\#\#\# Continuation kinds...]

The @dfn{block} structure represents a basic block, in the the normal
sense.  Control transfers other than simple sequencing are represented
by information in the block structure. The continuation for the last
node in a block represents only the destination for the result.

It is very difficult to reconstruct anything resembling the original
source from ICR, so we record the original source form in each
node. The location of the source form within the input is also
recorded, allowing for interfaces such as command{Edit Compiler
Warnings}. See section @xref{source-paths}.

Forms such as @code{special-bind} and catch need to have cleanup code
executed at all exit points from the form. We represent this
constraint in ICR by annotating the code syntactically within the form
with a cleanup structure describing what needs to be cleaned
up. Environment analysis determines the cleanup locations by watching
for a change in the cleanup between two continuations. We can't emit
cleanup code during ICR conversion, since we don't know which exits
will be local until after ICR optimizations are done.

Special binding is represented by a call to the funny function
@dfn{%special-bind}.  The first argument is the @code{global-var}
structure for the variable bound and the second argument is the value
to bind it to.

Some subprimitives are implemented using a macro-like mechanism for
translating @code{%primitive} forms into arbitrary lisp
code. Subprimitives 'special-cased' by VMR conversion are represented
by a call to the funny function @code{%%primitive}. The corresponding
@code{template} structure is passed as the first argument.

We check global function calls for syntactic legality with respect to
any defined function type function. If the call is illegal or we are
unable to tell if it is legal due to non-constant keywords, then we
give a warning and mark the function reference as @code{:notinline} to
force a full call and cause subsequent phases to ignore the call. If
the call is legal and is to a known function, then we annotate the
Combination node with the Function-Info structure that contains the
compiler information for the function.

@node Tail sets
@section Tail sets
@cindex tail sets



<EEK: was this done?> Probably want to have a GTN-like function result
equivalence class mechanism for ICR type inference. This would be like
the return value propagation being done by Propagate-From-Calls, but
more powerful, less hackish, and known to terminate. The ICR
equivalence classes could probably be used by GTN, as well.

What we do is have local call analysis eagerly maintain the
equivalence classes of functions that return the same way by
annotating functions with a Tail-Info structure shared between all
functions whose value could be the value of this function. We don't
require that the calls actually be tail-recursive, only that the call
deliver its value to the result continuation. [\#\#\# Actually now
done by @code{ir1-optimize-return}, which is currently making ICR
optimize mandatory.]

We can then use the @code{tail-set} during ICR type inference. It
would have a type that is the union across all equivalent functions of
the types of all the uses other than in local calls. This type would
be recomputed during optimization of @code{return} nodes. When the
type changes, we would propagate it to all calls to any of the
equivalent functions. How do we know when and how to recompute the
type for a tail-set?  Recomputation is driven by type propagation on
the result continuation.

This is really special-casing of @code{return} nodes. The
@code{return} node has the type which is the union of all the non-call
uses of the result. The tail-set is found though the lambda. We can
then recompute the overall union by taking the union of the type per
return node, rather than per-use.

How do result type assertions work?  We can't intersect the assertions
across all functions in the equivalence class, since some of the call
combinations may not happen (or even be possible). We can intersect
the assertion of the result with the derived types for non-call uses.

When we do a tail call, we obviously can't check that the returned
value matches our assertion. Although in principle, we would like to
be able to check all assertions, to preserve system integrity, we only
need to check assertions that we depend on. We can afford to lose some
assertion information as long as we entirely lose it, ignoring it for
type inference as well as for type checking.

Things will work out, since the caller will see the tail-info type as
the derived type for the call, and will emit a type check if it needs
a stronger result.

A remaining question is whether we should intersect the assertion with
per-@code{return} derived types from the very beginning (i.e. before
the type check pass). I think the answer is yes. We delay the type
check pass so that we can get our best guess for the derived type
before we decide whether a check is necessary. But with the function
return type, we aren't committing to doing any type check when we
intersect with the type assertion; the need to type check is still
determined in the type check pass by examination of the result
continuation.

What is the relationship between the per-@code{return} types and the
types in the result continuation?  The assertion is exactly the
@code{continuation-asserted-type} (note that the asserted type of
result continuations will never change after ICR conversion). <EEK:
Also note that it seems @code{use-union} is used instead> The
per-@code{return} derived type is different than the
Continuation-Derived-Type, since it is intersected with the asserted
type even before @command{Type Check} runs. Ignoring the
@code{continuation-asserted-type} <struct accessor defined in
@file{node.lisp} in CMUCL but not SBCL> probably makes life simpler
anyway, since this breaks the potential circularity of the
@code{tail-info-type} <EEK: in SBCL the only thing we can find is
@code{return-info-types}. In CMUCL there is the @code{tail-set} struct
in @file{node.lisp} which has @code{type} and @code{info} slots> will
affecting the @code{continuation-derived-type} <EEK: No longer found
in SBCL. In CMUCL was in @file{ir1opt.lisp}
@dfn{%continuation-derived-type}>, which affects...

When a given return has no non-call uses, we represent this by using
@code{*empty-type*}. This is consistent with the interpretation that a
return type of @code{nil} means the function can't return.



@node Hairy function representation
@section Hairy function representation
@cindex Hairy function representation

Non-@code{fixed-arg} functions are represented using
@code{optional-dispatch}. An @code{optional-dispatch} has an
entry-point function for each legal number of optionals, and one for
when extra args are present. Each entry point function is a simple
lambda. The entry point function for an optional is passed the
arguments which were actually supplied; the entry point function is
expected to default any remaining parameters and evaluate the actual
function body.

If no @code{supplied-p} arg is present, then we can do this fairly
easily by having each entry point supply its default and call the next
entry point, with the last entry point containing the body. If there
are @code{supplied-p} args, then entry point function is replaced with
a function that calls the original entry function with @code{t}'s inserted at
the position of all the supplied args with @code{supplied-p} parameters.

We want to be a bit clever about how we handle arguments declared
special when doing optional defaulting, or we will emit really gross
code for special optionals. If we bound the arg specially over the
entire entry-point function, then the entry point function would be
caused to be non-tail-recursive. What we can do is only bind the
variable specially around the evaluation of the default, and then read
the special and store the final value of the special into a lexical
variable which we then pass as the argument. In the common case where
the default is a constant, we don't have to special-bind at all, since
the computation of the default is not affected by and cannot affect
any special bindings.

Keyword and rest args are both implemented using a LEXPR-like `more
args' convention. The @code{more-entry} takes two arguments in
addition to the fixed and optional arguments: the argument context and
count.  @code{(ARG <context> <n>)} accesses the N'th additional
argument. Keyword args are implemented directly using this
mechanism. Rest args are created by calling @code{%listify-rest-args}
with the context and count.

The @code{more-entry} parses the keyword arguments and passes the
values to the main function as positional arguments. If a keyword
default is not constant, then we pass a @code{supplied-p} parameter
into the main entry and let it worry about defaulting the
argument. Since the main entry accepts keywords in parsed form, we can
parse keywords at compile time for calls to known functions. We keep
around the original parsed lambda-list and related information so that
people can figure out how to call the main entry.



@node ICR representation of non-local exits
@section ICR representation of non-local exits
@cindex ICR representation
@cindex non-local exits


All exits are initially represented by @code{exit} nodes:

How about an @code{exit} node:
@lisp
    (defstruct (exit (:include node))
      value)
@end lisp

The @code{exit} node uses the continuation that is to receive the
thrown Value.  During optimization, if we discover that the Cont's
home-lambda is the same as the @code{exit} node's, then we can delete
the @code{exit} node, substituting the Cont for all of the Value's
uses.

The successor block of an exit is the entry block in the entered
environment.  So we use the @code{exit} node to mark the place where
exit code is inserted. During environment analysis, we need only
insert a single block containing the entry point stub.

We ensure that all Exits that aren't for a @dfn{non-local exit} NLX
don't have any Value, so that local exits never require any value
massaging.
@cindex NLX

The Entry node marks the beginning of a block or tagbody:
@lisp 
    (defstruct (entry (:include node))
      (continuations nil :type list)) 
@end lisp

It contains a list of all the continuations that the body could exit
to. The @code{entry} node is used as a marker for the place to
snapshot state, including the control stack pointer. Each lambda has a
list of its Entries so that environment analysis can figure out which
continuations are really being closed over. There is no reason for
optimization to delete @code{entry} nodes, since they are harmless in
the degenerate case: we just emit no code (like a no-var @code{let}).


We represent CATCH using the lexical exit mechanism. We do a transformation
like this:

@lisp
(catch 'foo xxx)  ==>
(block #:foo
  (%catch #'(lambda () (return-from #:foo (%unknown-values)))
          'foo)
  (%within-cleanup :catch
    @var{xxx}))
@end lisp

@code{%catch} just sets up the catch frame which points to the exit
function. @code{%catch} is an ordinary function as far as ICR is
concerned. The fact that the catcher needs to be cleaned up is
expressed by the Cleanup slots in the continuations in the
body. @code{%unknown-values} is a dummy function call which represents
the fact that we don't know what values will be thrown.

@code{%within-cleanup} is a special special form that instantiates its
first argument as the current cleanup when converting the body. In
reality, the lambda is also created by the special special form
@code{%escape-function}, which gives the lambda a special
@code{:escape} kind so that the back end knows not to generate any
code for it.


We use a similar hack in @code{unwind-protect} to represent the fact
that the cleanup forms can be invoked at arbitrarily random times.

@lisp
(unwind-protect p c)  ==>
(flet ((#:cleanup () c))
  (block #:return
    (multiple-value-bind
        (#:next #:start #:count)
        (block #:unwind
          (%unwind-protect
           #'(lambda (x) (return-from #:unwind x)))
          (%within-cleanup :unwind-protect
            (return-from #:return p)))
      (#:cleanup)
      (%continue-unwind #:next #:start #:count))))
@end lisp

We use the block @code{#:unwind} to represent the entry to cleanup
code in the case where we are non-locally unwound. Calling of the
cleanup function in the drop-through case (or any local exit) is
handled by cleanup generation. We make the cleanup a function so that
cleanup generation can add calls at local exits from the protected
form. @code{#:next}, @code{#:start} and @code{#:count} are state used
in the case where we are unwound. They indicate where to go after
doing the cleanup and what values are being thrown. The cleanup
encloses only the protected form. As in @code{catch}, the escape
function is specially tagged as @code{:escape}. The cleanup function
is tagged as @code{:cleanup} to inhibit let conversion (since
references are added in environment analysis.)

Notice that implementing these forms using closures over continuations
eliminates any need to special-case ICR flow analysis. Obviously we
don't really want to make heap-closures here. In reality these
functions are special-cased by the back-end according to their KIND.



@node Block compilation
@section Block compilation
@cindex block compilation

One of the properties of ICR is that it supports @dfn{block
compilation} by allowing arbitrarily large amounts of code to be
converted at once, with actual compilation of the code being done at
will.

In order to preserve the normal semantics we must recognize that
proclamations (possibly implicit) are scoped. A proclamation is in
effect only from the time of appearance of the proclamation to the
time it is contradicted. The current global environment at the end of
a block is not necessarily the correct global environment for
compilation of all the code within the block. We solve this problem by
closing over the relevant information in the ICR at the time it is
converted. For example, each functional variable reference is marked
as inline, notinline or don't care. Similarly, each node contains a
structure known as a ``cookie'' which contains the appropriate
settings of the compiler policy switches.

We actually convert each form in the file separately, creating a
separate ``initial component'' for each one. Later on, these
components are merged as needed. The main reason for doing this is to
cause @code{eval-when} processing to be interleaved with reading.



@node Entry points
@section Entry points
@cindex entry point

Since we need to evaluate potentially arbitrary code in the
@dfn{External Entry Point} (XEP) argument forms (for type checking), we
can't leave the arguments in the wired passing locations. Instead, it
seems better to give the XEP max-args fixed arguments, with the
passing locations being the true passing locations. Instead of using
@code{%xep-arg}, we reference the appropriate variable.
@cindex XEP

Also, it might be a good idea to do argument count checking and dispatching
with explicit conditional code in the XEP. This would simplify both the code
that creates the XEP and the VMR conversion of XEPs. Also, argument count
dispatching would automatically benefit from any cleverness in compilation of
case-like forms (jump tables, etc). On the downside, this would push some
assumptions about how arg dispatching is done into ICR. But then we are
currently violating abstraction at least as badly in VMR conversion, which is
also supposed to be implementation independent.

As a side-effect of finding which references to known functions can be
converted to local calls, we find any references that cannot be
converted. References that cannot be converted to a local call must
evaluate to a ``function object'' (or function-entry) that can be
called using the full call convention. A function that can be called
from outside the component is called an ``entry-point''.

Lots of stuff that happens at compile-time with local function calls
must be done at run-time when an entry-point is called.

It is desirable for optimization and other purposes if all the calls
to every function were directly present in ICR as local calls. We
cannot directly do this with entry-point functions, since we don't
know where and how the entry-point will be called until run-time.

What we do is represent all the calls possible from outside the
component by local calls within the component. For each entry-point
function, we create a corresponding lambda called the external entry
point or XEP. This is a function which takes the number of arguments
passed as the first argument, followed by arguments corresponding to
each required or optional argument.

If an optional argument is unsupplied, the value passed into the XEP is
undefined. The XEP is responsible for doing argument count checking and
dispatching. 

In the case of a fixed-arg lambda, we emit a call to the
@code{verify-arg-count} funny function (conditional on policy),
then call the real function on the passed arguments. Even in this
simple case, we benefit several ways from having a separate XEP:

@itemize @bullet{}

@item The argument count checking is factored out, and only needs to
be done in full calls.

@item Argument type checking happens automatically as a consequence of
passing the XEP arguments in a local call to the real function.  This
type checking is also only done in full calls.

@item The real function may use a non-standard calling convention for
the benefit of recursive or block-compiled calls. The XEP converts
arguments/return values to/from the standard convention. This also
requires little special-casing of XEPs.

@end itemize

If the function has variable argument count (represented by an
@code{optional-dispatch}), then the XEP contains a @code{cond} which
dispatches off of the argument count, calling the appropriate
entry-point function (which then does defaulting). If there is a more
entry (for keyword or rest args), then the XEP obtains the more arg
context and count by calling the @code{%more-arg-context} funny
function.

All non-local-call references to functions are replaced with
references to the corresponding XEP. ICR optimization may discover a
local call that was previously a non-local reference. When we delete
the reference to the XEP, we may find that it has no references. In
this case, we can delete the XEP, causing the function to no longer be
an entry-point.


