-*- Mode: Text, Fill -*-

$Header: /Volumes/share2/src/cmucl/cvs2git/cvsroot/src/compiler/mips/random-doc.txt,v 1.3 1990/03/02 17:40:56 ch Rel $

DEFINE-STORAGE-BASE

  Define-Storage-Base Name Kind {Key Value}*

  Define a storage base having the specified Name.  Kind may be :Finite,
  :Unbounded or :Non-Packed.  The following keywords are legal:

  :Size <Size>
      Specify the number of locations in a :Finite SB or the initial size of a
      :Unbounded SB.


DEFINE-STORAGE-CLASS

  Define-Storage-Class Name Number Storage-Base {Key Value}*

  Define a storage class Name that uses the named Storage-Base.  Number is a
  small, non-negative integer that is used as an alias.  The following
  keywords are defined:

  :Element-Size <Size>
      The size of objects in this SC in whatever units the SB uses.  This
      defaults to 1.

  :Locations
      If the SB is :Finite, then this is a list of the offsets within the SB
      that are in this SC.

  
DEFINE-MOVE-COSTS

  Define-Move-Costs {((Source-SC*) {(Cost Dest-SC*)}*)}*

  This macro declares the cost of the implicit move operations needed to load
  arguments and store results.  The format is somewhat similar to the costs
  specifications in Define-VOP.  Each argument form gives the cost for moving
  to all possible destination SCs from some collection of equivalent source
  SCs.

  This information is used only to compute the cost of moves from arguments to
  Load TNs or from Load TNs to results.  It is not necessary to specify the
  costs for moves between combinations of SCs impossible in this context.


DEFINE-SAVE-SCS

  Define-Save-SCs {(save-sc saved-sc*)}*

  This form is used to define which SCs must be saved on a function call.  The
  Saved-SCs are SCs that must be saved.  The Save-SC a SC that is used in
  combination with the defined move costs to determine the cost of saving.


DEF-PRIMITIVE-TYPE

  Def-Primitive-Type Name (SC*) {Key Value}*

  Define a primitive type Name.  Each SC specifies a Storage Class that values
  of this type may be allocated in.  The following keyword options are defined:

  :Type
      The type descriptor for the Lisp type that is equivalent to this type
      (defaults to Name.)


DEF-BOOLEAN-ATTRIBUTE

  Def-Boolean-Attribute Name Attribute-Name*

  Define a new class of boolean attributes, with the attributes havin the
  specified Attribute-Names.  Name is the name of the class, which is used to
  generate some macros to manipulate sets of the attributes: 

    NAME-attributep attributes attribute-name*
      Return true if one of the named attributes is present, false otherwise.

    NAME-attributes attribute-name*
      Return a set of the named attributes.


PRIMITIVE-TYPE-VOP

  Primitive-Type-VOP Vop (Kind*) Type*

  Annotate all the specified primitive Types with the named VOP under each of
  the specified kinds:

  :Coerce-To-T
  :Coerce-From-T
  :Move
      One argument one result VOPs used for coercion between representations
      and explicit moves.

  :Check
      A one argument one result VOP that moves the argument to the result,
      checking that the value is of this type in the process.

DEFINE-VOP
 
  Define-VOP (Name [Inherits]) Spec*

  Define the symbol Name to be a Virtual OPeration in the compiler.  If
  specified, Inherits is the name of a VOP that we default unspecified
  information from.  Each Spec is a list beginning with a keyword indicating
  the interpretation of the other forms in the Spec:
  
  :Args {(Name {Key Value}*)}*
  :Results {(Name {Key Value}*)}*
      The Args and Results are specifications of the operand TNs passed to the
      VOP.  The following operand options are defined:

      :SCs (SC*)
      :Load T-or-NIL
	  :SCs specifies good SCs for this operand.  Other SCs will be
	  penalized according to move costs.  If :Load is true (the default),
	  then a load TN will be allocated if necessary, guaranteeing that the
	  operand is always one of the specified SCs.

      :More T-or-NIL
	  If specified, Name is bound to the TN-Ref for the first argument or
	  result following the fixed arguments or results.  A more operand must
	  appear last, and cannot be targeted or restricted.

      :Target Operand
	  This operand is targeted to the named operand, indicating a desire to
	  pack in the same location.  Not legal for results.
  
  :Conditional
      This is used in place of :Results with conditional branch VOPs.  There
      are no result values: the result is a transfer of control.  The
      consequent and alternative continuations are passed as the first and
      second :Info arguments.  A side-effect is to set the Predicate attribute
      for functions in the :Translate option.
  
  :Temporary ({Key Value}*) Name*
      Allocate a temporary TN for each Name, binding that variable to the TN
      within the body of the generators.  In addition to :Target (which is 
      is the same as for operands), the following options are
      defined:

      :Type Type
          Specify the primitive type for the temporary, default T.

      :SC SC-Name
      :Offset SB-Offset
	  Force the temporary to be allocated in the specified SC with the
	  specified offset.  Offset is evaluated at macroexpand time.

      :SCs (SC*)
	  Restrict the temporary to a subset of the SCs allowed by the type,
	  possibly requiring packing in a finite SC.

      :From Time-Spec
      :To Time-Spec
	  Specify the beginning and end of the temporary's lives.  The defaults
	  are :Load and :Save, i.e. the duration of the VOP.  The other
	  intervening phases are :Argument, :Eval and :Result.  Non-zero
	  sub-phases can be specified by a list, e.g. the second argument's
	  life ends at (:Argument 1).
  
  :Generator Cost Form*
      Specifies the translation into assembly code. Cost is the estimated cost
      of the code emitted by this generator. The body is arbitrary Lisp code
      that emits the assembly language translation of the VOP.  An Assemble
      form is wrapped around the body, so code may be emitted by using the
      local Inst macro.  During the evaluation of the body, the names of the
      operands and temporaries are bound to the actual TNs.
  
  :Effects Effect*
  :Affected Effect*
      Specifies the side effects that this VOP has and the side effects that
      effect its execution.  If unspecified, these default to the worst case.
  
  :Info Name*
      Define some magic arguments that are passed directly to the code
      generator.  The corresponding trailing arguments to VOP or %Primitive are
      stored in the VOP structure.  Within the body of the generators, the
      named variables are bound to these values.  Except in the case of
      :Conditional VOPs, :Info arguments cannot be specified for VOPS that are
      the direct translation for a function (specified by :Translate).

  :Ignore Name*
      Causes the named variables to be declared IGNORE in the generator body.

  :Variant Thing*
  :Variant-Vars Name*
      These options provide a way to parameterize families of VOPs that differ
      only trivially.  :Variant makes the specified evaluated Things be the
      "variant" associated with this VOP.  :Variant-Vars causes the named
      variables to be bound to the corresponding Things within the body of the
      generator.

  :Variant-Cost Cost
      Specifies the cost of this VOP, overriding the cost of any inherited
      generator.

  :Note String
      A short noun-like phrase describing what this VOP "does", i.e. the
      implementation strategy.  This is for use in efficiency notes.

  :Arg-Types Type*
  :Result-Types Type*
      Specify the template type restrictions used for automatic translation.
      If there is a :More operand, the last type is the more type. 
  
  :Translate Name*
      This option causes the VOP template to be entered as an IR2 translation
      for the named functions.

  :Policy {:Small | :Fast | :Safe | :Fast-Safe}
      Specifies the policy under which this VOP is the best translation.

  :Guard Form
      Specifies a Form that is evaluated in the global environment.  If
      form returns NIL, then emission of this VOP is prohibited even when
      all other restrictions are met.

  :Save-P {T | NIL | :Force-To-Stack}
      Indicates how a VOP wants live registers saved.


SC-CASE

  SC-Case TN {({(SC-Name*) | SC-Name | T} Form*)}*

  Case off of TN's SC.  The first clause containing TN's SC is evaulated,
  returning the values of the last form.  A clause beginning with T specifies a
  default.  If it appears, it must be last.  If no default is specified, and no
  clause matches, then an error is signalled.


DEFINE-MISCOP

  Define-Miscop Name Args {Key Value}*

  Define a miscop with the specified args/results and options.  The
  following keywords are defined:

  :results
     Defaults to '(r).

  :translate
  :policy
  :arg-types
  :result-types
  :cost
  :conditional


DEFINE-MISCOP-VARIANTS

  Define-Miscop-Variants Vop Names*

  Define a bunch of miscops VOPs that inherit the specified VOP and whose
  Template name, Miscop name and translate function are all the same.


DEF-SOURCE-TRANSFORM

  Def-Source-Transform Name Lambda-List Form*

  Define a macro-like source-to-source transformation for the function Name.
  A source transform may "pass" by returning a non-nil second value.  If the
  transform passes, then the form is converted as a normal function call.  If
  the supplied arguments are not compatible with the specified lambda-list,
  then the transform automatically passes.
  
  Source-Transforms may only be defined for functions.  Source transformation
  is not attempted if the function is declared Notinline.  Source transforms
  should not examine their arguments.  If it matters how the function is used,
  then Deftransform should be used to define an IR1 transformation.
  
  If the desirability of the transformation depends on the current Optimize
  parameters, then the Policy macro should be used to determine when to pass.


DEFKNOWN

  Defknown Name Arg-Types Result-Type [Attributes] {Key Value}* 

  Declare the function Name to be a known function.  We construct a type
  specifier for the function by wrapping (FUNCTION ...) around the Arg-Types
  and Result-Type.  Attributes is a an unevaluated list of the boolean
  attributes that the function has.  These attributes are meaningful here:
      call
         May call functions that are passed as arguments.  In order to determine
         what other effects are present, we must find the effects of all arguments
         that may be functions.
        
      unsafe
         May incorporate arguments in the result or somehow pass them upward.
        
      unwind
         May fail to return during correct execution.  Errors are O.K.
        
      any
         The (default) worst case.  Includes all the other bad things, plus any
         other possible bad thing.
        
      foldable
         May be constant-folded.  The function has no side effects, but may be
         affected by side effects on the arguments.  e.g. SVREF, MAPC.
        
      flushable
         May be eliminated if value is unused.  The function has no side effects
         except possibly CONS.  If a function is defined to signal errors, then
         it is not flushable even if it is movable or foldable.
        
      movable
         May be moved with impunity.  Has no side effects except possibly CONS,
         and is affected only by its arguments.

      predicate
          A true predicate likely to be open-coded.  This is a hint to IR1
	  conversion that it should ensure calls always appear as an IF test.
	  Not usually specified to Defknown, since this is implementation
	  dependent, and is usually automatically set by the Define-VOP
	  :Conditional option.

  Name may also be a list of names, in which case the same information is given
  to all the names.  The keywords specify the initial values for various
  optimizers that the function might have.


DEF-PRIMITIVE-TRANSLATOR

  Def-Primitive-Translator Name Lambda-List Form*

  Define a function that converts a use of (%PRIMITIVE Name ...) into Lisp
  code.  Lambda-List is a defmacro style lambda list.


CTYPE-OF

  CType-Of Object

  Like Type-Of, only returns a Type structure instead of a type
  specifier.  We try to return the type most useful for type checking,
  rather than trying to come up with the one that the user might find
  most informative.


SC-IS

  SC-Is TN SC*

  Returns true if TNs SC is any of the named SCs, false otherwise.







----------------------------------------------------------------





;;; $Header: /Volumes/share2/src/cmucl/cvs2git/cvsroot/src/compiler/mips/notes.txt,v 1.2 1990/02/07 14:05:49 ram Rel $



Call:

There are several different kinds of call, depending on what is going on.

The call can be named (i.e. use the symbol-function slot) or through a
function object.

The call can pass either a fixed number of args or a variable number of
args.

The call can return a fixed number of values, a variable number of values,
or be a tail call.



Register usage at the time of the call:

LEXENV:  Holds the lexical environment to use during the call if it's a
closure, or garbage if not.

CALL-NAME:  Holds the symbol for a named call and garbage for others.

OLD-CONT:  Holds the context pointer that should be restored upon return.

A0...An:  Holds the first n+1 args.

NARGS:  Holds the number of args, as a fixnum.

ARGS:  Holds a pointer to the args.  Note: indexes off of this pointer are
as if all the arguments were stored at it, e.g. the first stack arg is at
ARGS[n] where n is number of register args.  Because of this, ARGS is the
same as the callers CONT (OLD-CONT at the time of the call for non-tail
call).
[RAM: note that this must be set up even when NARGS<=n, since the callee may be
expecting more arguments (due to optionals or a bad call.)  ARGS must be
pointing to some valid chunk of memory, since the callee moves all of the
positional args before checking to see if they are actually supplied.]

LRA:  Holds the lisp-return-address object that the call should be returned
to.  Calculated for non-tail call, and left as is for tail call.

CSP:  Left as is.  The callee will set this as necessary based on CONT.

NSP:  ???
[RAM: will be managed similarly to CSP, i.e. callee has to allocate and is
required to deallocate.]

CONT:  The callee's context pointer.  Established as CSP for non-tail call,
and left as is for tail call.

CODE:  The function object being called.



Register usage at the time of the return for single value return:

A0:  The value.

CODE:  The lisp-return-address we returned to.

CSP:  Restored from CONT.
[RAM: i.e. stack is guaranteed to be clean.  No SP frobbing is necessary.]

CONT:  Restored from OLD-CONT.


Additional register usage for multiple value return:

NARGS:  Number of values being returned.

A0...An:  The first n+1 values, or NIL if there are less than n+1 values.

ARGS:  Pointer to the rest of the values.  The returnee's CONT.
[RAM: i.e. as with ARGS in call, points n+1 words before the first stack
value.]


CSP:  CONT + NARGS*4




What has to happen for this to work:

Caller:
  set NARGS
  set ARGS
  if tail call
    CONT <- OLD-CONT
  else
    calc LRA
    CONT <- CSP
  if named
    set CALL-NAME
  set LEXENV
  set CODE
  calc target addr (CODE + n)
  jr

Callee:
  allocate-frame
    emit function header.
    set CSP = CONT + size.
    do something with nsp
  setup-environment
    set CODE = CODE - n
  move-argument
    move stack args from ARGS[n] to CONT[n]

Returner:
  known values:
    move-result
      move values from CONT[n] to OLD-CONT[n].
    known-return
      CONT = OLD-CONT
      CODE = LRA
      calc target addr (CODE + n)
      jr

  unknown constant values (return VOP):
    nargs = 1 case:
      CSP = CONT
      CONT = OLD-CONT
      CODE = LRA
      calc target addr (CODE + n + 8)
      jr
    nargs != 1 case:
      set NARGS
      nil out unused arg regs
      ARGS = CONT
      CSP = CONT + NARGS * word-bytes
      CONT = OLD-CONT
      CODE = LRA
      calc target addr (CODE + n)
      jr

  unknown variable values (return-multiple VOP):
    copy the args from wherever to the top of the stack.
[RAM: I would phrase this "to the beginning of the current (returner's) frame".
They will already be there except with RETURN-MULTIPLE (when they *will* be on
the stack top.)  But then after any copy, we adjust CSP so that the values are
once again on stack top.]
    nil out unused arg regs
    ARGS = CONT
    CSP = CONT + NARGS * word-bytes
    CONT = OLD-CONT
    CODE = LRA
    calc target addr (CODE + n)
    jr


Returnee:
  want fixed number of values:


  want variable number of values:
