

@chapter Introduction


Internal Design of CMU Common Lisp 
on the IBM RT PC



David B. McDonald
Scott E. Fahlman
Skef Wholey


CMU-CS-87-157



@strong{EEK: The purpose for temporarily adding this historical
work is to demonstrate how to coordinate the documentation of a
specific port with the hardware abstracted description of SBCL
provided in the rest of the document.}

CMU Common Lisp is an implementation of Common Lisp that currently
runs on the IBM RT PC under Mach, a Berkeley Unix 4.3 binary
compatible operating system. This document describes low level
details of the implementation. In particular, it describes the data
formats used for all Lisp objects, the assembler language routines
(miscops) used to support compiled code, the function call and return
mechanism, and other design information necessary to understand the
underlying structure of the CMU Common Lisp implementation on the IBM
RT PC under the Mach operating system.


Contract=Strategic87-90


This document is based heavily on the document @i{Revised Internal Design
of Spice Lisp} by Skef Wholey, Scott Fahlman, and Joseph Ginder.

The FASL file format was designed by Guy L. Steele Jr. and Walter van
Roggen, and the appendix on this subject is their document with very few
modifications.


@section Scope and Purpose

This document describes a new implementation of CMU Common Lisp (nee
Spice Lisp) as it is implemented on the DinkyMachine @footnote{Note
that the DinkyMachine is essentially what would become the CMU CL and
later SBCL virtual machine. The name is used here to distinguish the
RT PC backend format from PERQ and Vax at a moment of transitioning
all development to the new backend.} running Mach, a Berkeley Unix 4.3
binary compatible operating system. This design is undergoing rapid
change, and for the present is not guaranteed to accurately describe
any past, present, or future implementation of CMU Common Lisp. All
questions and comments on this material should be directed to David
B. McDonald (David.McDonald@@CS.CMU.EDU).
@cindex DinkyMachine

This document specifies the hand-coded assembler routines (miscops) and
virtual memory architecture of the DinkyMachine CMU Common Lisp system.
This is a working document, and it will change frequently as the system is
developed and maintained. If some detail of the system does not agree with
what is specified here, it is to be considered a bug.

@section Notational Conventions
@cindex Bit numbering
@cindex Byte numbering
CMU Common Lisp objects are 32 bits long. The high-order bit of each word is
numbered 0; the low-order bit is numbered 31. If a word is broken into smaller
units, these are packed into the word from left to right. For example, if we
break a word into bytes, byte 0 would occupy bits 0-7, byte 1 would occupy
8-15, byte 2 would occupy 16-23, and byte 3 would occupy 24-31.

All CMU Common Lisp documentation uses decimal as the default radix; other
radices will be indicated by a subscript (as in 77@-[8]) or by a clear
statement of what radix is in use.

@node Data Types and Object Formats
@chapter Data Types and Object Formats

@node Lisp Objects
@section Lisp Objects
@cindex lisp object

lisp objects are 32 bits long. They come in 32 basic types, divided
into three classes: immediate data types, pointer types, and
forwarding pointer types. The storage formats are as follows:

@cindex immediate object format
@cindex pointer object format


@smallexample
Immediate Data Types:
 0             4 5                                                   31
------------------------------------------------------------------------
| Type Code (5) |              Immediate Data (27)                     |
------------------------------------------------------------------------

Pointer and Forwarding Types:
 0             4 5              6 7                     29           31
------------------------------------------------------------------------
| Type Code (5) | Space Code (2) |    Pointer (23)        | Unused (2) |
------------------------------------------------------------------------
@end smallexample



@section Table of Type Codes
@cindex type code


@multitable @columnfractions 0.08 0.22 0.2 0.5

@headitem Code @tab Type @tab Class @tab Explanation

@item 0 @tab + Fixnum @tab Immediate @tab Positive fixnum, miscop code, etc.
@item 1 @tab GC-Forward @tab Pointer @tab GC forward pointer, used during GC.
@item 4 @tab Bignum @tab Pointer @tab Bignum.
@item 5 @tab Ratio @tab Pointer @tab Two words: numerator, denominator.
@item 6 @tab + Short Float @tab Immediate @tab Positive short flonum.
@item 7 @tab - Short Float @tab Immediate @tab Negative short flonum.
@item 8 @tab Single Float @tab Pointer @tab Single precision float.
@item 9 @tab Double Float @tab Pointer @tab Double precision float (?).
@item 9 @tab Long Float @tab Pointer @tab Long float.
@item 10 @tab Complex @tab Pointer @tab Two words: real, imaginary parts.
@item 11 @tab String @tab Pointer @tab Character string.
@item 12 @tab Bit-Vector @tab Pointer @tab Vector of bits
@item 13 @tab Integer-Vector @tab Pointer @tab Vector of integers
@item 14 @tab General-Vector @tab Pointer @tab Vector of Lisp objects.
@item 15 @tab Array @tab Pointer @tab Array header.
@item 16 @tab Function @tab Pointer @tab Compiled function header.
@item 17 @tab Symbol @tab Pointer @tab Symbol.
@item 18 @tab List @tab Pointer @tab Cons cell.
@item 20 @tab C. S. Pointer @tab Pointer @tab Pointer into control stack.
@item 21 @tab B. S. Pointer @tab Pointer @tab Pointer into binding stack.
@item 26 @tab Interruptible @tab Immediate @tab Marks a miscop as interruptible.
@item 27 @tab Character @tab Immediate @tab Character object.
@item 28 @tab Values-Marker @tab Immediate @tab Multiple values marker.
@item 29 @tab Catch-All @tab Immediate @tab Catch-All object.
@item 30 @tab Trap @tab Immediate @tab Illegal object trap.
@item 31 @tab- Fixnum @tab Immediate @tab Negative fixnum.

@end multitable


@section [Table of Space Codes]
@cindex [Space codes]

@verbatim

Code    Space           Explanation
----    -----           -----------
0       Dynamic-0       Storage normally garbage collected, space 0.
1       Dynamic-1       Storage normally garbage collected, space 1.
2       Static          Permanent objects, never moved or reclaimed.
3       Read-Only       Objects never moved, reclaimed, or altered.
@end verbatim





@section Immediate Data Type Descriptions

@table @code

@cindex Fixnum format
@item Fixnum
28-bit two's complement integer. The sign bit is stored redundantly
in the top 5 bits of the word.

@cindex [Short float format]
@item Short-Float
The sign bit is stored as part of the type code,
allowing a 28 bit signed short float format. The format of short floating
point numbers is:
@end table


@smallexample
 0             3     4      5           12 13               31
---------------------------------------------------------------
| Type code (4) | Sign (1) | Exponent (8) |   Mantissa (19)   |
---------------------------------------------------------------
@end smallexample

@table @code

@cindex DinkyMachine
@item @w{}
The floating point number is the same format as the DinkyMachine
supports for single precision numbers, except it has been shifted
right by four bits for the type code. The result of any operation is
therefore truncated. Long floating point numbers are also available if
you need more accuracy and better error propagation properties.


@cindex [Character object]
@item Character
A character object holding a character code, control bits, and font
in the following format:
@end table


@smallexample
 0             4 6         7  8       15 16      23 24      31
---------------------------------------------------------------
| Type code (5) | Unused (3) | Font (8) | Bits (8) | Code (8) |
---------------------------------------------------------------
@end smallexample


@table @code

@cindex [Values-Marker]
@item Values-Marker
Used to mark the presence of multiple values on the stack. The
low 16 bits indicate how many values are being returned. Note that only 65535
values can be returned from a multiple-values producing form. These are pushed
onto the stack in order, and the Values-Marker is returned in register A0.

@cindex [Catch-All object]
@item Catch-All
Object used as the catch tag for unwind-protects. Special things
happen when a catch frame with this as its tag is encountered during a throw.
See section @ref{Catch} for details.

@cindex [Trap]
@cindex [Illegal object trap]
@item Trap
Illegal object trap. This value is used in symbols to signify an
undefined value or definition.

@cindex [Interruptible Marker]
@item Interruptible-Marker
Object used to mark a miscop as interruptible. This
object is put in one of the registers and signals to the interrupt handler
that the miscop can be interrupted safely. Only miscops that can take a long
time (e.g., length when passed a circular list, system call miscops that
may wait indefinitely) are marked this way.


@end table





@section [Pointer-Type Objects and Spaces]
@cindex [Pointer object format]
@cindex [Virtual memory]

Each of the pointer-type lisp objects points into a different space in virtual
memory. There are separate spaces for Bit-Vectors, Symbols, Lists, and so on.
The 5-bit type-code provides the high-order virtual address bits for the
object, followed by the 2-bit space code, followed by the 25-bit pointer
address. This gives a 30-bit virtual address to a 32-bit word; since the
DinkyMachine is a byte-addressed machine, the two low-order
bits are 0. In effect we have carved a 30-bit space into a fixed set
of 23-bit subspaces, not all of which are used.

@cindex [Space codes]
The space code divides each of the type spaces into four sub-spaces,
as shown in the table above. At any given time, one of the dynamic
spaces is considered newspace, while the other is oldspace.
During a stop and copy garbage collection, a ``flip'' can be done, turning the
old newspace into the new oldspace. All type-spaces are flipped at once.
Allocation of new dynamic objects always occurs in newspace.

@cindex [Static space]
@cindex [Read-only space]
Optionally, the user (or system functions) may allocate objects in
static or read-only space. Such objects are never reclaimed once they
are allocated -- they occupy the space in which they were initially
allocated for the lifetime of the Lisp process. The advantage of
static allocation is that the GC never has to move these objects,
thereby saving a significant amount of work, especially if the objects
are large. Objects in read-only space are static, in that they are
never moved or reclaimed; in addition, they cannot be altered once
they are set up. Pointers in read-only space may only point to
read-only or static space, never to dynamic space. This saves even
more work, since read-only space does not need to be scavenged, and
pages of read-only material do not need to be written back onto the
disk during paging.

Objects in a particular type-space will contain either pointers to
garbage-collectible objects or words of raw non-garbage-collectible bits, but
not both. Similarly, a space will contain either fixed-length objects or
variable-length objects, but not both.  A variable-length object always
contains a 24-bit length field right-justified in the first word, with
the positive fixnum type-code in the high-order five bits. The remaining three
bits can be used for sub-type information. The length field gives the
size of the object in 32-bit words, including the header word.  The
garbage collector needs this information when the object is moved, and
it is also useful for bounds checking.

The format of objects in each space are as follows:

@node Bignums


@table @code
@cindex [Symbol]
@cindex [Value cell]
@cindex [Definition cell]
@cindex [Property list cell]
@cindex [Plist cell]
@cindex [Print name cell]
@cindex [Pname cell]
@cindex [Package cell]
@item Symbol
Each symbol is represented as a
fixed-length block of boxed Lisp cells. The number of cells
per symbol is 5, in the following order:
@verbatim
0  Value cell for shallow binding.
1  Definition cell: a function or list.
2  Property list: a list of attribute-value pairs.
3  Print name: a string.
4  Package: the obarray holding this symbol.
@end verbatim

@cindex [List cell]
@item List
A fixed-length block of two boxed Lisp cells, the CAR and the CDR.

@cindex [General-Vector format]
@cindex [G-Vector format]
@cindex [Vector format]
@item General-Vector
Vector of lisp objects, any length. The first word is a fixnum
giving the number of words allocated for the vector (up to 24 bits). The
highest legal index is this number minus 2. The second word is vector entry 0,
and additional entries are allocated contiguously in virtual memory. General
vectors are sometimes called G-Vectors. (See section @ref{Vectors} for further
details.)

@cindex [Integer-Vector format]
@cindex [I-Vector format]
@cindex [Vector format]
@item Integer-Vector
Vector of integers, any length. The 24 low bits of the first
word give the allocated length in 32-bit words. The low-order 28 bits of the
second word gives the length of the vector in entries, whatever the length of
the individual entries may be.  The high-order 4 bits of the second word
contain access-type information that yields, among other things, the number of
bits per entry. Entry 0 is left-justified in the third word of the vector.
Bits per entry will normally be powers of 2, so they will fit neatly into
32-bit words, but if necessary some empty space may be left at the low-order
end of each word. Integer vectors are sometimes called I-Vectors. (See
section @ref{Vectors} for details.)

@cindex [Bit-Vector format]
@cindex [Vector format]
@item Bit-Vector
Vector of bits, any length. Bit-Vectors are represented in a form
identical to I-Vectors, but live in a different space for efficiency reasons.

@cindex [Bignum format]
@item Bignum
Bignums are infinite-precision integers, represented in a format
identical to G-Vectors. Each bignum is stored as a series of 32-bit words,
with the low-order word stored first. The representation is two's complement,
but the sign of the number is redundantly encoded in the type field of the
fixnum in the header word. If this fixnum is non-negative, then so is the
bignum, if it is negative, so is the bignum.

@cindex [Flonum format]
@cindex [Flonum formats]
@cindex [Floating point formats]
@item Floats
Floats are stored as two or more consecutive words of bits, in the
following format:

@smallexample
----------------------------------------------------------
|  Header word, used only for GC forward pointers.       |
----------------------------------------------------------
|  Appropriate number of 32-bit words in machine format  |
----------------------------------------------------------
@end smallexample

The number of words used to represent a floating point number is one plus the
size of the floating point number being stored. The floating point numbers
will be represented in whatever format the DinkyMachine expects. The
extra header word is needed so that a valid floating point number is not
mistaken for a gc-forward pointer during a garbage collection.

@cindex [Ratio format]
@item Ratio
Ratios are stored as two consecutive words of Lisp objects, which should
both be integers.

@cindex [Complex number format]
@item Complex
Complex numbers are stored as two consecutive words of Lisp objects,
which should both be numbers.

@cindex [Array format]
@item Array
This is actually a header which holds the accessing and
other information about the array. The actual array contents are held in a
vector (either an I-Vector or G-Vector) pointed to by an entry in
the header. The header is identical in format to a G-Vector. For
details on what the array header contains, see section @ref{Arrays}.

@cindex [String format]
@item String
A vector of bytes. Identical in form to I-Vectors with the access type
always 8-Bit. However, instead of accepting and returning fixnums, string
accesses accept and return character objects. Only the 8-bit code field is
actually stored, and the returned character object always has bit and font
values of 0.

@cindex [Function object format]
@item Function
A compiled CMU Common Lisp function consists of both lisp
objects and raw bits for the code. The Lisp objects are stored in
the Function space in a format identical to that used for general
vectors, with a 24-bit length field in the first word. This object
contains assorted parameters needed by the calling machinery, a
pointer to an 8-bit I-Vector containing the compiled code, a number
of pointers to symbols used as special variables within the function,
and a number of lisp objects used as constants by the function.
@end table



@section [Forwarding Pointers]
@cindex [Forwarding pointers]

@table @code
@cindex [GC-Forward pointer]
@item GC-Forward
When a data structure is transported into newspace, a GC-Forward
pointer is left behind in the first word of the oldspace object. This points
to the same type-space in which it is found. For example, a GC-Forward in
G-Vector space points to a structure in the G-Vector newspace.  GC-Forward
pointers are only found in oldspace.
@end table

@section [System and Stack Spaces]
@cindex [System table space]
@cindex [Stack spaces]
@cindex [Control stack space]
@cindex [Binding stack space]
@cindex [Special binding stack space]

The virtual addresses below 08000000@-[16] are not occupied by Lisp objects,
since Lisp objects with type code 0 are positive fixnums. Some of this space
is used for other purposes by Lisp. A couple of pages (4096 byte pages)
at address 00100000@-[16] contain tables that Lisp needs to access
frequently. These include the allocation table, the active-catch-frame,
information to link to C routines, etc. Memory at location 00200000@-[16]
contains code for various miscops. Also, any C code loaded into a running
Lisp process is loaded after the miscops. The format of the allocation
table is described in chapter @ref{Alloc-Chapter}.

The control stack grows upward (toward higher addresses) in memory,
and is a framed stack. It contains only general Lisp objects (with
some random things encoded as fixnums). Every object
pointed to by an entry on this stack is kept alive. The frame for a
function call contains an area for the function's arguments, an area
for local variables, a pointer to the caller's frame, and a pointer
into the binding stack. The frame for a Catch form contains similar
information. The precise stack format can be found in chapter
@ref{Runtime}.

The special binding stack grows downward. This stack is used to hold
previous values of special variables that have been bound. It grows and
shrinks with the depth of the binding environment, as reflected in the
control stack.  This stack contains symbol-value pairs, with only boxed
Lisp objects present.

All Lisp objects are allocated on word boundaries, since the
DinkyMachine can only access words on word boundaries.

@node Vectors
@section Vectors and Arrays
@cindex vectors

Common Lisp arrays can be represented in a few different ways in CMU Common
Lisp -- different representations have different performance advantages.
Simple general vectors, simple vectors of integers, and simple strings are
basic CMU Common Lisp data types, and access to these structures is quicker
than access to non-simple (or ``complex'') arrays. However, all
multi-dimensional arrays in CMU Common Lisp are complex arrays, so
references to these are always through a header structure.

@subsection [General Vectors]
@cindex [General-Vector format]

G-Vectors contain Lisp objects. The format is as follows:

@verbatim
------------------------------------------------------------------
|  Fixnum code (5) | Subtype (3) |   Allocated length (24)       |
------------------------------------------------------------------
|  Vector entry 0   (Additional entries in subsequent words)     |
------------------------------------------------------------------
@end verbatim

The first word of the vector is
a header indicating its length; the remaining words hold the boxed entries of
the vector, one entry per 32-bit word.  The header word is of type fixnum. It
contains a 3-bit subtype field, which is used to indicate several special types
of general vectors. At present, the following subtype codes are defined:

@cindex [DEFSTRUCT]
@cindex [Hash tables]

@itemize @bullet{}
0 Normal. Used for assorted things.

1 Named structure created by DEFSTRUCT, with type name in entry 0.

2 EQ Hash Table, last rehashed in dynamic-0 space.

3 EQ Hash Table, last rehashed in dynamic-1 space.

4 EQ Hash Table, must be rehashed.
@end itemize

Following the subtype is a 24-bit field indicating how many 32-bit words are
allocated for this vector, including the header word. Legal indices into the
vector range from zero to the number in the allocated length field minus 2,
inclusive. Normally, the index is checked on every access to the vector.
Entry 0 is stored in the second word of the vector, and subsequent entries
follow contiguously in virtual memory.

Once a vector has been allocated, it is possible to reduce its length by using
the Shrink-Vector miscop, but never to increase its length, even back to
the original size, since the space freed by the reduction may have been
reclaimed. This reduction simply stores a new smaller value in the length
field of the header word.

It is not an error to create a vector of length 0, though it will always be an
out-of-bounds error to access such an object. The maximum possible length for
a general vector is 2@+[24]-2 entries, and that can't fit in the available
space.  The maximum length is 2@+[23]-2 entries, and that is only possible if
no other general vectors are present in the space.

@cindex [Bignum Format]
Bignums are identical in format to G-Vectors although each entry is a 32-bit
integer, and thus only assembler routines should ever access an entry.

@cindex [Function object format]
@cindex [Array format]
Objects of type Function and Array are identical in format to
general vectors, though they have their own spaces.

@subsection [Integer Vectors]
@cindex [Integer-Vector format]

I-Vectors contain unboxed items of data, and their format is more complex. The
data items come in a variety of lengths, but are of constant length within a
given vector. Data going to and from an I-Vector are passed as Fixnums, right
justified. Internally these integers are stored in packed form, filling 32-bit
words without any type-codes or other overhead. The format is as follows:

@verbatim
----------------------------------------------------------------
| Fixnum code (5) | Subtype (3) |  Allocated length (24)       |
----------------------------------------------------------------
| Access type (4) | Number of entries (28)                     |
----------------------------------------------------------------
| Entry 0 left justified                                       |
----------------------------------------------------------------
@end verbatim

The first word of an I-Vector
contains the Fixnum type-code in the top 5 bits, a 3-bit subtype code in the
next three bits, and the total allocated length of the vector (in 32-bit words)
in the low-order 24 bits. At present, the following subtype codes are defined:

@itemize @bullet{}
0 Normal. Used for assorted things.

1 Code. This is the code-vector for a function object.
@end itemize

The second word of the vector is the one that is looked at every
time the vector is accessed. The low-order 28 bits of this word
contain the number of valid entries in the vector, regardless of how
long each entry is. The lowest legal index into the vector is always
0; the highest legal index is one less than this number-of-entries
field from the second word. These bounds are checked on every access.
Once a vector is allocated, it can be reduced in size but not increased.
The Shrink-Vector miscop changes both the allocated length field
and the number-of-entries field of an integer vector.

@cindex [Access-type codes]
The high-order 4 bits of the second word contain an access-type code
which indicates how many bits are occupied by each item (and therefore
how many items are packed into a 32-bit word).  The encoding is as follows:
@verbatim
0   1-Bit                       8   Unused
1   2-Bit                       9   Unused
2   4-Bit                       10  Unused
3   8-Bit                       11  Unused
4   16-Bit                      12  Unused
5   32-Bit                      13  Unused
6   Unused                      14  Unused
7   Unused                      15  Unused
@end verbatim

In I-Vectors, the data items are packed into the third and subsequent
words of the vector. Item 0 is left justified in the third word,
item 1 is to its right, and so on until the allocated number of items
has been accommodated. All of the currently-defined access types
happen to pack neatly into 32-bit words, but if this should not be
the case, some unused bits would remain at the right side of each
word. No attempt will be made to split items between words to use up
these odd bits. When allocated, an I-Vector is initialized to all
0's.

As with G-Vectors, it is not an error to create an I-Vector of length
0, but it will always be an error to access such a vector. The
maximum possible length of an I-Vector is 2@+[28]-1 entries or
2@+[23]-3 words, whichever is smaller.

@cindex [String format]
Objects of type String are identical in format to I-Vectors, though they have
their own space. Strings always have subtype 0 and access-type 3 (8-Bit).
Strings differ from normal I-Vectors in that the accessing miscops accept
and return objects of type Character rather than Fixnum.

@node Arrays
@subsection Arrays
@cindex arrays

An array header is identical in form to a G-Vector. Like any G-Vector, its
first word contains a fixnum type-code, a 3-bit subtype code, and a 24-bit
total length field (this is the length of the array header, not of the vector
that holds the data). At present, the subtype code is always 0. The entries
in the header-vector are interpreted as follows:

@cindex [Array header format]

@table @emph
@item 0 Data Vector
This is a pointer to the I-Vector, G-Vector, or string that
contains the actual data of the array.  In a multi-dimensional array, the
supplied indices are converted into a single 1-D index which is used to access
the data vector in the usual way.

@item 1 Number of Elements
This is a fixnum indicating the number of elements for
which there is space in the data vector.

@item 2 Fill Pointer
This is a fixnum indicating how many elements of the data
vector are actually considered to be in use. Normally this is initialized to
the same value as the Number of Elements field, but in some array applications
it will be given a smaller value. Any access beyond the fill pointer is
illegal.

@item 3 Displacement
This fixnum value is added to the final code-vector index
after the index arithmetic is done but before the access occurs. Used for
mapping a portion of one array into another. For most arrays, this is 0.

@item 4 Range of First Index
This is the number of index values along the first
dimension, or one greater than the largest legal value of this index (since the
arrays are always zero-based).  A fixnum in the range 0 to 2@+[24]-1. If any
of the indices has a range of 0, the array is legal but will contain no data
and accesses to it will always be out of range. In a 0-dimension array, this
entry will not be present.

@item 5 - N  Ranges of Subsequent Dimensions
@end table




The number of dimensions of an array can be determined by looking at the length
of the array header. The rank will be this number minus 6. The maximum array
rank is 65535 - 6, or 65529.

The ranges of all indices are checked on every access, during the conversion to
a single data-vector index. In this conversion, each index is added to the
accumulating total, then the total is multiplied by the range of the following
dimension, the next index is added in, and so on. In other words, if the data
vector is scanned linearly, the last array index is the one that varies most
rapidly, then the index before it, and so on.

@node Known-Objects
@section Symbols Known to the Assembler Routines

A large number of symbols will be pre-defined when a CMU Common Lisp system
is fired up. A few of these are so fundamental to the operation of the
system that their addresses have to be known to the assembler routines.
These symbols are listed here. All of these symbols are in static space,
so they will not move around.

@table @code
@cindex [NIL]

@item NIL
94000000@-[16] The value of NIL is always NIL; it is an error
to alter it. The plist of NIL is always NIL; it is an error to alter
it. NIL is unique among symbols in that it is stored in Cons cell
space and thus you can take its CAR and CDR, yielding NIL in either
case. NIL has been placed in Cons cell space so that the more common
operations on lists will yield the desired results. This slows down
some symbol operations but this should be insignificant compared to
the savings in list operations. A test for NIL for the
DinkyMachine is:
@example
        xiu     R0,P,X'9400'
        bz      IsNIL   or bnz  IsNotNIL
@end example

@cindex [T]
@item T
8C000000@-[16]  The value of T is always T; it is an error
to alter it. A similar sequence of code as for NIL above can test for T,
if necessary.

@cindex [%SP-Internal-Apply]
@item %SP-Internal-Apply
8C000014@-[16] The function stored in the definition cell
of this symbol is called by an assembler routine whenever compiled code calls
an interpreted function.

@cindex [%SP-Internal-Error]
@item %SP-Internal-Error
8C000028@-[16] The function stored in the definition cell
of this symbol is called whenever an error is detected during the execution of
an assembler routine. See section @ref{Errors} for details.

@cindex [%SP-Software-Interrupt-Handler]
@item %SP-Software-Interrupt-Handler
8C00003C@-[16] The function stored in the
definition cell of this symbol is called whenever a software interrupt occurs.
See section @ref{Interrupts} for details.

@cindex [%SP-Internal-Throw-Tag]
@item %SP-Internal-Throw-Tag
8C000050@-[16] This symbol is bound to the tag being
thrown when a Catch-All frame is encountered on the stack. See section
@ref{Catch} for details.

@cindex [%Initial-function]
@item %Initial-function
8c000064@-[16] This symbol's function cell should contain
a function that is called when the initial core image is started. This
function should initialize all the data structures that Lisp needs to run.

@cindex [%Link-table-header]
@item %Link-table-header
8c000078@-[16] This symbol's value cell contains a pointer
to the link table information.

@cindex [Current-allocation-space]
@item Current-allocation-space
8c00008c@-[16] This symbol's value cell contains
an encoded form of the current space that new lisp objects are to be allocated
in.

@cindex [%SP-bignum/fixnum]
@item %SP-bignum/fixnum
8c0000a0@-[16] This function is invoked by the miscops
when a division of a bignum by a fixnum results in a ratio.

@cindex [%SP-fixnum/bignum]
@item %SP-bignum/bignum
8c0000b4@-[16] This
function is invoked by the miscops when a division of a fixnum by a
bignum results in a ratio.

@cindex [%SP-bignum/bignum]
@item %SP-bignum/bignum
8c0000c8@-[16] This function is invoked by the miscops
when a division of a bignum by a bignum results in a ratio.

@cindex [%SP-abs-ratio]
@item %SP-abs-ratio
8c0000dc@-[16] This function is invoked by the miscops
when the absolute value of a ratio is taken.

@cindex [%SP-abs-complex]
@item %SP-abs-complex
8c0000f0@-[16] This function is invoked by the miscops
when the absolute value of a complex is taken.

@cindex [%SP-negate-ratio]
@item %SP-negate-ratio
8c000104@-[16] This function is invoked by the miscops
when a ratio is to be negated.

@cindex [%SP-negate-complex]
@item %SP-negate-ratio
8c000118@-[16] This function is invoked by the miscops
when a complex is to be negated.

@cindex [%SP-integer+ratio]
@item %SP-integer+ratio
8c00012c@-[16] This function is invoked by the miscops
when a fixnum or bignum is added to a ratio.

@cindex [%SP-ratio+ratio]
@item %SP-ratio+ratio
8c000140@-[16] This function is invoked by the miscops
when a ratio is added to a ratio.

@cindex [%SP-complex+number]
@item %SP-complex+number
8c000154@-[16] This function is invoked by the miscops
when a complex is added to a number.

@cindex [%SP-number+complex]
@item %SP-number+complex
8c000168@-[16] This function is invoked by the miscops
when a number is added to a complex.

@cindex [%SP-complex+complex]
@item %SP-complex+complex
8c00017c@-[16] This function is invoked by the miscops
when a number is added to a complex.

@cindex [%SP-1+ratio]
@item %SP-1+ratio
8c000190@-[16] This function is invoked by the miscops when
1 is added to a ratio.

@cindex [%SP-1+complex]
@item %SP-1+complex
8c000190@-[16] This function is invoked by the miscops when
1 is added to a complex.

@cindex [%SP-ratio-integer]
@item %SP-ratio-integer
8c0001b8@-[16] This function is invoked by the miscops
when an integer is subtracted from a ratio.

@cindex [%SP-ratio-ratio]
@item %SP-ratio-ratio
8c0001cc@-[16] This function is invoked by the miscops
when an ratio is subtracted from a ratio.

@cindex [%SP-complex-number]
@item %SP-complex-number
8c0001e0@-[16] This function is invoked by the miscops
when a complex is subtracted from a number.

@cindex [%SP-number-complex]
@item %SP-number-complex
8c0001f4@-[16] This function is invoked by the miscops
when a number is subtracted from a complex.

@cindex [%SP-complex-complex]
@item %SP-complex-complex
8c000208@-[16] This function is invoked by the miscops
when a complex is subtracted from a complex.

@cindex [%SP-1-complex]
@item %SP-1-complex
8c000230@-[16] This function is invoked by the miscops when
1 is subtracted from a complex.

@cindex [%SP-ratio*ratio]
@item %SP-ratio*ratio
8c000244@-[16] This function is invoked by the miscops to
multiply two ratios.

@cindex [%SP-number*complex]
@item %SP-number*complex
8c000258@-[16] This function is invoked by the miscops to
multiply a number by a complex.

@cindex [%SP-complex*number]
@item %SP-complex*number
8c00026c@-[16] This function is invoked by the miscops to
multiply a complex by a number.

@cindex [%SP-complex*complex]
@item %SP-complex*complex
8c000280@-[16] This function is invoked by the miscops
to multiply a complex by a complex.

@cindex [%SP-integer/ratio]
@item %SP-integer/ratio
8c000294@-[16] This function is invoked by the miscops to
divide an integer by a ratio.

@cindex [%SP-ratio/integer]
@item %SP-ratio/integer
8c0002a8@-[16] This function is invoked by the miscops to
divide a ratio by an integer.

@cindex [%SP-ratio/ratio]
@item %SP-ratio/ratio
8c0002bc@-[16] This function is invoked by the miscops to
divide a ratio by a ratio.

@cindex [%SP-number/complex]
@item %SP-number/complex
8c0002d0@-[16] This function is invoked by the miscops to
divide a number by a complex.

@cindex [%SP-complex/number]
@item %SP-complex/number
8c0002e4@-[16] This function is invoked by the miscops to
divide a complex by a number.

@cindex [%SP-complex/complex]
@item %SP-complex/complex
8c0002f8@-[16] This function is invoked by the miscops
to divide a complex by a complex.

@cindex [%SP-integer-truncate-ratio]
@item %SP-integer-truncate-ratio
8c00030c@-[16] This function is invoked by the
miscops to truncate an integer by a ratio.

@cindex [%SP-ratio-truncate-integer]
@item %SP-ratio-truncate-integer
8c000320@-[16] This function is invoked by the
miscops to truncate a ratio by an integer.

@cindex [%SP-ratio-truncate-ratio]
@item %SP-ratio-truncate-ratio
8c000334@-[16] This function is invoked by the
miscops to truncate a ratio by a ratio.

@cindex [%SP-number-truncate-complex]
@item %SP-number-truncate-complex
8c000348@-[16] This function is invoked by the
miscops to truncate a number by a complex.

@cindex [%SP-complex-truncate-number]
@item %SP-complex-truncate-number
8c00035c@-[16] This function is invoked by the
miscops to truncate a complex by a number.

@cindex [%SP-complex-truncate-complex]
@item %SP-complex-truncate-complex
8c000370@-[16] This function is invoked by
the miscops to truncate a complex by a complex.

@cindex [maybe-gc]
@item Maybe-GC
8c000384@-[16] This function may be invoked by any miscop that
does allocation. This function determines whether it is time to garbage
collect or not. If it is it performs a garbage collection. Whether it
invokes a garbage collection or not, it returns the single argument passed
to it.

@cindex [Lisp-environment-list]
@item Lisp-environment-list
8c000398@-[16] The value of this symbol is
set to the a list of the Unix environment strings passed into the Lisp
process. This list by Lisp to obtain various environment information, such
as the user's home directory, etc.

@cindex [Call-lisp-from-c]
@item Call-lisp-from-C
8c0003ac@-[16] This function is called whenever a
C function called by Lisp tries to call a Lisp function.

@cindex [Lisp-command-line-list]
@item Lisp-command-line-list
8c0003c0@-[16] The value of this symbol is
set to the list of strings passed into the Lisp process as the command
line.

@cindex [*Nameserverport*]
@item *Nameserverport*
8c0003d4@-[16] The value of this symbol is set to
the C global variable name_server_port. This allows Lisp to access the
name server.

@cindex [*Ignore-Floating-Point-Underflow*]
@item *Ignore-Floating-Point-Underflow*
8c0003e8@-[16] If the the value of this
symbol is NIL then an error is signalled when floating point underflow
occurs, otherwise the operation quietly returns zero.
@end table




@node Runtime
@chapter Runtime Environment
@cindex Runtime Environment

@section Register Allocation
@cindex Register allocation
To describe the assembler support routines in chapter @ref{Instr-Chapter} and
the complicated
control conventions in chapter @ref{Control-Conventions} requires that we talk
about the allocation of the 16 32-bit general purpose registers provided
by the DinkyMachine.

@table @code
@cindex [Program-Counter register]
@item Program-Counter (PC) [R15]
This register contains an index into the current
code vector when a Lisp function is about to be called. When a miscop is
called, it contains the return address. It may be used as a super temporary
between miscop and function calls.

@cindex [Active-Function-Pointer register]
@item Active-Function-Pointer (AF) [R14]
This register contains a pointer to the
active function object. It is used to access the symbol and constant area for
the currently running function.

@cindex [Active-Frame-Pointer register]
@item Active-Frame-Pointer (FP) [R13]
This register contains a pointer to the
current active frame on the control stack. It is used to access the arguments
and local variables stored on the control stack.

@cindex [Binding-Stack-Pointer register]
@item Binding-Stack-Pointer (BS) [R12]
This register contains the current binding
stack pointer.  The binding stack is a downward growing stack and follows
a decrement-write/increment-read discipline.

@cindex [Local registers]
@item Local registers (L0-L4) [R7-R11]
These registers contain locals and saved
arguments for the currently executing function. Functions may use these
registers, so that stack accesses can be reduced, since a stack access is
relatively expensive compared to a register access.

@cindex [Argument registers]
@item Argument register (A0, A1, A2) [R1, R3, R5]
These registers contain arguments
to a function or miscop that has just been called. On entry to a function
or miscop, they contain the first three arguments. The first thing a function
does is to move the contents of these registers into the local registers.

@cindex [Miscop argument register]
@item Miscop argument register (A3) [R4]
This register is used to pass a fourth
argument to miscops requiring four or more arguments. It is also used as a
super temporary by the compiler.

@cindex [Control-Stack-Pointer register]
@item Control-Stack-Pointer (CS) [R6]
The stack pointer for the control stack, an
object of type Control-Stack-Pointer. Points to the last used word in
Control-Stack space; this upward growing stack uses a
increment-write/read-decrement discipline.

@cindex [Non-Lisp temporary registers]
@item Non-Lisp temporary registers (NL0, NL1) [R0, R2]
These registers are used to
contain non-Lisp values. They will normally be used during miscop calls, but
may also be used in in-line code to contain temporary data. These are the only
two registers never examined by the garbage collector, so no pointers to Lisp
objects should be stored here (since they won't get updated during a garbage
collection).
@end table


@node Fn-Format
@section Function Object Format

Each compiled function is represented in the machine as a Function
Object. This is identical in form to a G-Vector of lisp objects, and
is treated as such by the garbage collector, but it exists in a
special function space. (There is no particular reason for this
distinction. We may decide later to store these things in G-Vector
space, if we become short on spaces or have some reason to believe
that this would improve paging behavior.)  Usually, the function
objects and code vectors will be kept in read-only space, but nothing
should depend on this; some applications may create, compile, and
destroy functions often enough to make dynamic allocation of function
objects worthwhile.

@cindex [Code vector]
@cindex [Constants in code] The function object contains a vector of
header information needed by the function-calling mechanism: a
pointer to the I-Vector that holds the actual code. Following this
is the so-called ``symbols and constants'' area. The first few
entries in this area are fixnums that give the offsets into the code
vector for various numbers of supplied arguments. Following this
begin the true symbols and constants used by the function. Any
symbol used by the code as a special variable.
Fixnum constants can be generated faster
with in-line code than they can be accessed from the function-object,
so they are not stored in the constants area.

The subtype of the G-Vector header indicates the type of the function:
@itemize @bullet{}
@item 0 - A normal function (expr).

@item 1 - A special form (fexpr).

@item 2 - A defmacro macroexpansion function.

@item 3 - An anonymous expr. The name is the name of the parent function.

@item 4 - A compiled top-level form.
@end itemize

Only the fexpr information has any real meaning to the system. The rest
is there for the printer and anyone else who cares.


After the one-word G-Vector header, the entries of the function object
are as follows:

@multitable @columnfractions 0.10 0.9
@item 0 @tab Name of the innermost enclosing named function.
@item 1 @tab Pointer to the unboxed Code vector holding the
             instructions.
@item 2 @tab A fixnum with bit fields as follows:
@item   @tab 24 - 31: The minimum legal number of args (0 to 255).
@item   @tab 16 - 23: The maximum number of args, not counting &rest (0 to 255).
@item   @tab      The fixnum has a negative type code, if the
                  function accepts a &rest arg and a positive one otherwise.
@item 3 @tab A string describing the source file from which the
             function was defined. See below for a description of the format.
@item 4 @tab A string containing a printed representation of the
             argument list, for documentation purposes. If the
             function is a defmacro macroexpansion function, the
             argument list will be the one originally given to
             defmacro rather than the actual arglist to the expansion
             function.
@item 5 @tab The symbols and constants area starts here. This word is
             entry 0 of the symbol/constant area.
@item   @tab The first few entries in this area are fixnums
             representing the
@item   @tab code-vector entry points for various numbers of optional
             arguments.
@end multitable

@node Defined-From-String-Format
@section Defined-From String Format
@cindex Defined-From String Format

The defined-from string may have any of three different formats, depending
on which of the three compiling functions compiled it:

@table @code
@item compile-file "@i[filename user-time universal-time]"
  The @i[filename] is
the namestring of the truename of the file the function was defined from.
The time is the file-write-date of the file.

@item compile "Lisp on @i[user-time], machine @i[machine universal-time]"
The time is the time that the function was compiled. @i[Machine] is the
machine-instance of the machine on which the compilation was done.

compile-from-stream "@i[stream] on @i[user-time], machine @i[machine-instance
@item universal-time]"
@i[Stream] is the printed representation of the stream
compiled from. The time is the time the compilation started.
@end table


An example of the format of @i[user-time] is 6-May-86 1:04:44. The
@i[universal-time] is the same time represented as a decimal integer.
It should be noted that in each case, the universal time is the last
thing in the string.

@node Control-Stack-Format
@section Control-Stack Format
@cindex Control-stack format

The CMU Common Lisp control stack is a framed stack. Call frames, which hold
information for function calls, are intermixed with catch frames, which hold
information used for non-local exits. In addition, the control stack is used
as a scratchpad for random computations.

@subsection Call Frames
@cindex Open frame
@cindex Active frame

At any given time, the machine contains pointers to the current top
of the control stack and the start of the current active frame (in
which the current function is executing). In addition, there is a
pointer to the current top of the special binding stack. CMU Common Lisp
on the Perq also has a pointer to an open frame. An open frame is
one which has been partially built, but which is still having
arguments for it computed. When all the arguments have been computed
and saved on the frame, the function is then started. This means
that the call frame is completed, becomes the current active frame,
and the function is executed. At this time, special variables may be
bound and the old values are saved on the binding stack. Upon
return, the active frame is popped away and the result is either sent
as an argument to some previously opened frame or goes to some other
destination. The binding stack is popped and old values are
restored.

On the DinkyMachine, open frames still exist, however, no register is
allocated to point at the most recent one. Instead, a count of the arguments
to the function is kept. In most cases, a known fixed number of arguments are
passed to a function, and this is all that is needed to calculate the correct
place to set the active frame pointer.
In some cases, it is not as simple, and runtime calculations are necessary to
set up the frame pointer. These calculations are simple except in some very
strange cases.

The active frame contains pointers to the previously-active frame and
to the point to which the binding stack will be popped
on exit, among other things. Following this is a vector of storage locations
for the function's arguments and local variables. Space is allocated for the
maximum number of arguments that the function can take, regardless of how many
are actually supplied.

In an open frame, stack space is allocated up to the point where the arguments
are stored. Nothing is stored in the frame
at this time.   Thus, as arguments are computed, they can simply be pushed on
the stack. Since the first three arguments are passed in registers, it is
sometimes necessary to save these values when succeeding arguments are
complicated. When the function is finally started, the remainder of the frame
is built (including storing all the
registers that must be saved).  A call frame looks like this:
@verbatim
0   Saved local 0 register.
1   Saved local 1 register.
2   Saved local 2 register.
3   Saved local 3 register.
4   Saved local 4 register.
5   Pointer to previous binding stack.
6   Pointer to previous active frame.
7   Pointer to previous active function.
8   Saved PC of caller. A fixnum.
9   Args-and-locals area starts here. This is entry 0.
@end verbatim
The first slot is pointed to by the Active-Frame register if this frame is
currently active.


@subsection [Catch Frames]
@cindex [Catch]
@cindex [Catch frames]

Catch frames contain much of the same information that call frames
do, and have a very similar format. A catch frame holds the function
object for the current function, a stack pointer to the current
active frame, a pointer to the current top of the binding stack, and
a pointer to the previous catch frame. When a Throw occurs, an
operation similar to returning from this catch frame (as if it
were a call frame) is performed, and the stacks are unwound to the
proper place for continued execution in the current function. A
catch frame looks like this:
@verbatim
0   Pointer to current binding stack.
1   Pointer to current active frame.
2   Pointer to current function object.
3   Destination PC for a Throw.
4   Tag caught by this catch frame.
5   Pointer to previous catch frame.
@end verbatim
The conventions used to manipulate call and catch frames are described in
chapter @ref{Control-Conventions}.

@section [Binding-Stack Format]
@cindex [Binding stack format]

Each entry of the binding-stack consists of two boxed (32-bit) words. Pushed
first is a pointer to the symbol being bound. Pushed second is the symbol's
old value (any boxed item) that is to be restored when the binding stack is
popped.

@node Alloc-Chapter
@chapter Storage Management
@cindex Storage management
@cindex Garbage Collection

@cindex [Free-Storage pointer]
@cindex [Clean-Space pointer]
New objects are allocated from the lowest unused addresses within the specified
space.  Each allocation call specifies how many words are wanted, and a
Free-Storage pointer is incremented by that amount. There is one of these
Free-Storage pointers for each space, and it points to the lowest free address
in the space. There is also a Clean-Space pointer associated with each space
that is used during garbage collection. These pointers are stored in a table
which is indexed by the type and space code. The
address of the Free-Storage pointer for a given space is

@verbatim
        (+ alloc-table-base (lsh type 5) (lsh space 3)).
@end verbatim

The address of the Clean-Space pointer is

@verbatim
        (+ alloc-table-base (lsh type 5) (lsh space 3) 4).
@end verbatim


Common Lisp on the DinkyMachine uses a stop-and-copy garbage
collector to reclaim storage. The Collect-Garbage miscop performs a
full GC. The algorithm used is a degenerate form of Baker's
incremental garbage collection scheme. When the Collect-Garbage miscop
is executed, the following happens:

@enumerate
@item The current newspace becomes oldspace, and the current oldspace
becomes newspace.

@item The newspace Free-Storage and Clean-Space pointers are
initialized to point to the beginning of their spaces.

@item The objects pointed at by contents of all the registers
containing Lisp objects are transported if necessary.

@item The control stack and binding stack are scavenged.

@item Each static pointer space is scavenged.

@item Each new dynamic space is scavenged. The scavenging of the
dynamic spaces continues until an entire pass through all of them does
not result in anything being transported. At this point, every live
object is in newspace.

@end enumerate

A Lisp-level GC function returns the oldspace pages to Mach.





@cindex [Transporter]
@section [The Transporter]
The transporter moves objects from oldspace to newspace. It is given an
address @i[A], which contains the object to be transported, @i[B]. If @i[B] is
an immediate object, a pointer into static space, a pointer into read-only
space, or a pointer into newspace, the transporter does nothing.

If @i[B] is a pointer into oldspace, the object it points to must be
moved. It may, however, already have been moved. Fetch the first
word of @i[B], and call it @i[C]. If @i[C] is a GC-forwarding
pointer, we form a new pointer with the type code of @i[B] and the
low 27 bits of @i[C]. Write this into @i[A].

If @i[C] is not a GC-forwarding pointer, we must copy the object that
@i[B] points to. Allocate a new object of the same size in newspace,
and copy the contents. Replace @i[C] with a GC-forwarding pointer to
the new structure, and write the address of the new structure back
into @i[A].

Hash tables maintained with an EQ relation need special treatment by the
transporter. Whenever a G-Vector with subtype 2 or 3 is transported to
newspace, its subtype code is changed to 4. The Lisp-level hash-table
functions will see that the subtype code has changed, and re-hash the entries
before any access is made.



@cindex [Scavenger]
@section [The Scavenger] The scavenger looks through an area of
pointers for pointers into oldspace, transporting the objects they
point to into newspace. The stacks and static spaces need to be
scavenged once, but the new dynamic spaces need to be scavenged
repeatedly, since new objects will be allocated while garbage
collection is in progress. To keep track of how much a dynamic space
has been scavenged, a Clean-Space pointer is maintained. The
Clean-Space pointer points to the next word to be scavenged. Each
call to the scavenger scavenges the area between the Clean-Space
pointer and the Free-Storage pointer. The Clean-Space pointer is
then set to the Free-Storage pointer. When all Clean-Space pointers
are equal to their Free-Storage pointers, GC is complete.

To maintain (and create) locality of list structures, list space is
treated specially. When a list cell is transported, if the cdr points
to oldspace, it is immediately transported to newspace. This continues until
the end of the list is encountered or a non-oldspace pointer occurs in the cdr
position. This linearizes lists in the cdr direction which should
improve paging performance.

@node PURIFY
@section Purification
@cindex purification

Garbage is created when the files that make up a CMU Common Lisp system are
loaded. Many functions are needed only for initialization and
bootstrapping (e.g. the ``one-shot'' functions produced by the compiler for
random forms between function definitions), and these can be thrown away
once a full system is built. Most of the functions in the system, however,
will be used after initialization. Rather than bend over backwards to make
the compiler dump some functions in read-only space and others in dynamic
space (which involves dumping their constants in the proper spaces, also),
@i[everything] is dumped into dynamic space. A purify miscop is provided
that does a garbage collection and moves accessible information in dynamic
space into read-only or static space.





@node Instr-Chapter
@chapter Assembler Support Routines
@cindex assembler support routines

To support compiled Common Lisp code many hand coded assembler
language routines (miscops) are required. These routines accept
arguments in the three argument registers, the special miscop
argument register, and in a very few cases on the stack. The current
register assignments are:

@itemize @bullet{}
A0 contains the first argument.

A1 contains the second argument.

A2 contains the third argument.

A3 contains the fourth argument.
@end itemize

The rest of the arguments are passed on the stack with the last
argument at the end of the stack. All arguments on the stack must be
popped off the stack by the miscop. All miscops return their
values in register A0. A few miscops return two or three values,
these are all placed in the argument registers. The main return
value is stored in register A0, the others in A1 and A2. The
compiler must generate code to use the multiple values correctly,
i.e., place the return values on the stack and put a values marker in
register A0 if multiple-values are wanted. Otherwise the compiler
can use the value(s) it needs and ignore the rest. NB: Most of the
miscops follow this scheme, however, a few do not. Any
discrepancies are explained in the description of particular
miscops.

Several of the instructions described in the Perq Internal Design Document do
not have associated miscops, rather they have been code directly in-line.
Examples of these instructions include push, pop, bind, bind-null, many of the
predicates, and a few other instructions. Most of these instructions can be
performed in 4 or fewer DinkyMachine instructions and the overhead of
calling a miscop seemed overly expensive. Some instructions are encoded
in-line or as a miscop call depending on settings of compiler optimization
switches. If space is more important than speed, then some Perq instructions
are compiled as calls to out of line miscops rather than generating in-line
code.

@node macro-codes
@section Miscop Descriptions

There are 10 classes of miscops: allocation, stack manipulation,
list manipulation, symbol manipulation, array manipulation, type predicate,
arithmetic and logical, function call and return,
miscellaneous, and system hacking.

@subsection [Allocation]

All non-immediate objects are allocated in the ``current allocation
space,'' which is dynamic space, static space, or read-only space. The
current allocation space is initially dynamic space, but can be
changed by using the Set-Allocation-Space miscop below. The current
allocation space can be determined by using the Get-Allocation-Space
miscop. One usually wants to change the allocation space around some
section of code; an unwind protect should be used to insure that the
allocation space is restored to some safe value.



@table @code
@cindex [Get-Allocation-Space]
@item Get-Allocation-Space (@i[])
returns 0, 2, or 3 if the current allocation
space is dynamic, static, or read-only, respectively.

@cindex [Set-Allocation-Space]
@item Set-Allocation-Space (@i[X])
sets the current allocation space to dynamic,
static, or read-only if @i[X] is 0, 2, or 3 respectively. Returns @i[X].

@cindex [Alloc-Bit-Vector]
@item Alloc-Bit-Vector (Length)
returns a new bit-vector @i[Length] bits long,
which is allocated in the current allocation space. @i[Length] must be a
positive fixnum.

@cindex [Alloc-I-Vector]
@item Alloc-I-Vector (@i[Length A])
returns a new I-Vector @i[Length]
bytes long, with the access code specified by @i[A]. @i[Length] and
@i[A] must be positive fixnums.

@cindex [Alloc-String]
@item Alloc-String (@i[Length])
 returns a new string @i[Length] characters long.
@i[Length] must be a fixnum.

@cindex [Alloc-Bignum]
@item Alloc-Bignum (@i[Length])
returns a new bignum @i[Length] 32-bit words long.
@i[Length] must be a fixnum.

@cindex [Make-Complex]
@item Make-Complex (@i[Realpart Imagpart])
returns a new complex number with the
specified @i[Realpart] and @i[Imagpart]. @i[Realpart] and @i[Imagpart] should
be the same type of non-complex number.

@cindex [Make-Ratio]
@item Make-Ratio (@i[Numerator Denominator])
returns a new ratio with the
specified @i[Numerator] and @i[Denominator]. @i[Numerator] and
@i[Denominator] should be integers.

@cindex [Alloc-G-Vector]
@item Alloc-G-Vector (@i[Length Initial-Element])
returns a new G-Vector
with @i[Length] elements initialized to @i[Initial-Element].
@i[Length] should be a fixnum.

@cindex [Static-Alloc-G-Vector]
@item Static-G-Vector (@i[Length Initial-Element])
returns a new G-Vector in
static allocation space with @i[Length] elements initialized to
@i[Initial-Element].

@cindex [Vector]
@item Vector (@i[Elt@-[0] Elt@-[1] ... Elt@-[Length - 1] Length])
returns a new
G-Vector containing the specified @i[Length] elements.  @i[Length] should be a
fixnum and is passed in register A0. The rest of the arguments are passed on
the stack.

@cindex [Alloc-Function]
@item Alloc-Function (@i[Length])
returns a new function with @i[Length] elements.
@i[Length] should be a fixnum.

@cindex [Alloc-Array]
@item Alloc-Array (@i[Length])
returns a new array with @i[Length] elements.
@i[Length] should be a fixnum.

@cindex [Alloc-Symbol]
@item Alloc-Symbol (@i[Print-Name])
returns a new symbol with the print-name as
@i[Print-Name]. The value is initially Trap, the definition is Trap,
the property list and the package are initially NIL. The symbol is
not interned by this operation -- that is done in Lisp code.
@i[Print-Name] should be a simple-string.

@cindex [Cons]
@item Cons (@i[Car Cdr])
returns a new cons with the specified @i[Car] and @i[Cdr].

@cindex [List]
@item List (@i[Elt@-[0] Elt@-[1] ... Elt@-[CE - 1] Length])
returns a new list
containing the @i[Length] elements. @i[Length] should be fixnum and is
passed in register NL0. The first three arguments are passed in A0, A1, and
A2. The rest of the arguments are passed on the stack.

@cindex [List*]
@item List* (@i[Elt@-[0] Elt@-[1] ... Elt@-[CE - 1] Length])
returns a list* formed
by the @i[Length-1] elements. The last element is placed in the cdr of the
last element of the new list formed. @i[Length] should be a fixnum and is
passed in register NL0. The first three arguments are passed in A0, A1, and
A2. The rest of the arguments are passed on the stack.

@cindex [mv-list]
@item MV-List (@i[Elt@-<0> Elt@-<1> ... Elt@-<CE - 1> Length])
returns a list
formed from the elements, all of which are on the stack. @i[Length] is
passed in register A0. This miscop is invoked when multiple values from
a function call are formed into a list.
@end table

@subsection [Stack Manipulation]


@table @code
@cindex [Push]
@item Push (@i[E])
pushes E on to the control stack.

@cindex [Pop]
@item Pop (@i[E])
pops the top item on the control stack into @i[E].

@cindex [NPop]
@item NPop (@i[N])
If @i[N] is positive, @i[N] items are popped off of the stack.
If @i[N] is negative, NIL is pushed onto the stack -@i[N] times. @i[N] must be
a fixnum.

@cindex [Bind-Null]
@item Bind-Null (@i[E])
pushes @i[E] (which must be a symbol) and its current value
onto the binding stack, and sets the value of @i[E] to NIL. Returns NIL.

@cindex [Bind]
@item Bind (Value Symbol)
pushes @i[Symbol] (which must be a symbol) and its current
value onto the binding stack, and sets the value cell of @i[Symbol] to
@i[Value]. Returns @i[Symbol].

@cindex [Unbind]
@item Unbind (@i[N])
undoes the top @i[N] bindings on the binding stack.
@end table

@subsection [List Manipulation]

@table @code
@cindex [Car]
@cindex [Cdr]
@cindex [Caar]
@cindex [Cadr]
@cindex [Cdar]
@cindex [Cddr]
@item Car, Cdr, Caar, Cadr, Cdar, Cddr (@i[E])
returns the car, cdr, caar, cadr,
cdar, or cddr of @i[E] respectively.

@cindex [Set-Cdr]
@cindex [Set-Cddr]
@item Set-Cdr, Set-Cddr (@i[E])
The cdr or cddr of the contents of @i[E] is stored
in @i[E]. The contents of @i[E] should be either a list or NIL.

@cindex [Set-Lpop]
@item Set-Lpop (@i[E])
The car of the contents of @i[E] is returned;
the cdr of the contents of @i[E] is stored in @i[E]. The contents of @i[E]
should be a list or NIL.

@cindex [Spread]
@item Spread (@i[E])
pushes the elements of the list @i[E] onto the stack in
left-to-right order.

@cindex [Replace-Car]
@cindex [Replace-Cdr]
@item Replace-Car, Replace-Cdr (@i[List Value])
sets the car or cdr of the @i[List]
to @i[Value] and returns @i[Value].

@cindex [Endp]
@item Endp (X)
sets the condition code eq bit to 1 if @i[X] is NIL, or 0 if @i[X] is
a cons cell. Otherwise an error is signalled.

@cindex [Assoc]
@cindex [Assq]
@item Assoc, Assq (@i[List Item])
returns the first cons in the association-list
@i[List] whose car is EQL to @i[Item]. If the = part of the EQL comparison
bugs out (and it can if the numbers are too complicated), a Lisp-level Assoc
function is called with the current cdr of the @i[List]. Assq returns the
first cons in the association-list @i[List] whose car is EQ to @i[Item].

@cindex [Member]
@cindex [Memq]
@item Member, Memq (@var{List Item})
returns the first cons in
the list @var{List} whose car is EQL to @var{Item}. If the = part of the
EQL comparison bugs out, a Lisp-level Member function is called with
the current cdr of the @var{List}. Memq returns the first cons in
@var{List} whose car is EQ to the @var{Item}.

@cindex [GetF]

@item GetF (@var{List Indicator Default})
searches for the @var{Indicator} in
the list @var{List}, cddring down as the Common Lisp form GetF would.
If @var{Indicator} is found, its associated value is returned,
otherwise @var{Default} is returned.
@end table

@subsection [Symbol Manipulation]

Most of the symbol manipulation miscops are compiled in-line rather than
actual calls.

@table @code
@cindex [Get-Value]
@item Get-Value (@var{Symbol})
returns the value of @var{Symbol} (which must be a
symbol). An error is signalled if @var{Symbol} is unbound.

@cindex [Set-Value]
@item Set-Value (@var{Symbol Value})
sets the value cell of the symbol @var{Symbol} to
@var{Value}. @var{Value} is returned.

@cindex [Get-Definition]
@item Get-Definition (@var{Symbol})
returns the definition of the symbol
@var{Symbol}. If @var{Symbol} is undefined, an error is signalled.

@cindex [Set-Definition]
@item Set-Definition (@var{Symbol Definition})
sets the definition of the symbol
@var{Symbol} to @var{Definition}. @var{Definition} is returned.

@cindex [Get-Plist]
@item Get-Plist (@var{Symbol})
returns the property list of the symbol @var{Symbol}.

@cindex [Set-Plist] 
@item Set-Plist (@var{Symbol Plist})
sets the property
list of the symbol @var{Symbol} to
@var{Plist}. @var{Plist} is returned.

@cindex [Get-Pname]
@item Get-Pname (@var{Symbol})
returns the print name of the symbol @var{Symbol}.

@cindex [Get-Package]
@item Get-Package (@var{Symbol})
returns the package cell of the symbol @var{Symbol}.

@cindex [Set-Package]
@item Set-Package (@var{Symbol Package})
sets the package cell of the symbol
@var{Symbol} to @var{Package}. @var{Package} is returned.

@cindex [Boundp]
@item Boundp (@var{Symbol})
sets the eq condition code bit to 1 if the symbol
@var{Symbol} is bound; sets it to 0 otherwise.

@cindex [FBoundp]
@item FBoundp (@var{Symbol})
sets the eq condition code bit to 1 if the symbol
@var{Symbol} is defined; sets it to 0 otherwise.

@cindex [Get]
@item Get (@var{Symbol} @var{Indicator} @var{Default})
searches the property list of
@var{Symbol} for @var{Indicator} and returns the associated value. If
@var{Indicator} is not found, @var{Default} is returned.

@cindex [Put]
@item Put (@var{Symbol} @var{Indicator} @var{Value})
searches the property list of
@var{Symbol} for @var{Indicator} and replaces the associated value with @var{Value}.
If @var{Indicator} is not found, the @var{Indicator} @var{Value} pair are consed onto
the front of the property list.
@end table

@subsection [Array Manipulation]

Common Lisp arrays have many manifestations in CMU Common Lisp. The CMU
Common Lisp data types Bit-Vector, Integer-Vector, String, General-Vector,
and Array are used to implement the collection of data types the Common
Lisp manual calls ``arrays.''

In the following miscop descriptions, ``simple-array'' means an array
implemented in CMU Common Lisp as a Bit-Vector, I-Vector, String, or
G-Vector. ``Complex-array'' means an array implemented as a CMU Common Lisp
Array object. ``Complex-bit-vector'' means a bit-vector implemented as a
CMU Common Lisp array; similar remarks apply for ``complex-string'' and so
forth.

@table @code
@cindex [Vector-Length]
@cindex [G-Vector-Length]
@cindex [Simple-String-Length]
@cindex [Simple-Bit-Vector-Length] Vector-Length
@item (@var{Vector})
returns the length of the one-dimensional Common Lisp array
@var{Vector}. G-Vector-Length, Simple-String-Length, and
Simple-Bit-Vector-Length return the lengths of G-Vectors, CMU Common Lisp
strings, and CMU Common Lisp Bit-Vectors respectively. @var{Vector} should
be a vector of the appropriate type.

@cindex [Get-Vector-Subtype]
@item Get-Vector-Subtype (@var{Vector})
returns the subtype field of the vector
@var{Vector} as an integer. @var{Vector} should be a vector of some sort.

@cindex [Set-Vector-Subtype]
@item Set-Vector-Subtype (@var{Vector A})
sets the subtype field of the vector
@var{Vector} to @var{A}, which must be a fixnum.

@cindex [Get-Vector-Access-Code]
@item Get-Vector-Access-Code (@var{Vector})
returns the access code of the I-Vector
(or Bit-Vector) @var{Vector} as a fixnum.

@cindex [Shrink-Vector]
@item Shrink-Vector (@var{Vector Length})
sets the length field and the
number-of-entries field of the vector @var{Vector} to @var{Length}. If the vector
contains Lisp objects, entries beyond the new end are set to Trap.
Returns the shortened vector. @var{Length} should be a fixnum. One cannot
shrink array headers or function headers.

@cindex [Typed-Vref]
@item Typed-Vref (@var{A Vector I})
returns the @var{I}'th element of the I-Vector
@var{Vector} by indexing into it as if its access-code were @var{A}. @var{A} and
@var{I} should be fixnums.

@cindex [Typed-Vset]
@item Typed-Vset (@var{A Vector I Value})
sets the @var{I}'th element of the I-Vector
@var{Vector} to @var{Value} indexing into @var{Vector} as if its access-code were
@var{A}.        @var{A}, @var{I}, and @var{Value} should be fixnums.    @var{Value} is returned.

@cindex [Header-Length]
@item Header-Length (@var{Object})
returns the number of Lisp objects in the header of
the function or array @var{Object}. This is used to find the number of
dimensions of an array or the number of constants in a function.

@cindex [Header-Ref]
@item Header-Ref (@var{Object I})
returns the @var{I}'th element of the function or
array header @var{Object}. @var{I} must be a fixnum.

@cindex [Header-Set]
@item Header-Set (@var{Object I Value})
sets the @var{I}'th element of the function of
array header @var{Object} to @var{Value}, and pushes @var{Value}. @var{I} must be a
fixnum.
@end table

The names of the miscops used to reference and set elements of arrays are
based somewhat on the Common Lisp function names. The SVref, SBit, and SChar
miscops perform the same operation as their Common Lisp namesakes --
referencing elements of simple-vectors, simple-bit-vectors, and simple-strings
respectively. Aref1 references any kind of one dimensional array.
The names of setting functions are derived by replacing ``ref'' with ``set'',
``char'' with ``charset'', and ``bit'' with ``bitset.''

@table @code
@cindex [Aref1]
@cindex [SVref]
@cindex [SChar]
@cindex [SBit]
@item Aref1, SVref, SChar, SBit (@var{Array I})
returns the @var{I}'th element of the
one-dimensional
array @var{Array}. SVref pushes an element of a G-Vector; SChar an element of a
string; Sbit an element of a Bit-Vector. @var{I} should be a fixnum.

@cindex [Aset1]
@cindex [SVset]
@cindex [SCharset]
@cindex [SBitset]
@item Aset1, SVset, SCharset, SBitset (@var{Array I Value})
sets the @var{I}'th element
of the one-dimensional
array @var{Array} to @var{Value}. SVset sets an element of a G-Vector; SCharset an
element of a string; SBitset an element of a Bit-Vector. @var{I} should be a
fixnum and @var{Value} is returned.

@cindex [CAref2]
@cindex [CAref3]
@item CAref2, CAref3 (@var{Array I1 I2})
returns the element (@var{I1}, @var{I2}) of the
two-dimensional array @var{Array}. @var{I1} and @var{I2} should be
fixnums. CAref3 pushes the element (@var{I1}, @var{I2}, @var{I3}).

@cindex [CAset2]
@cindex [CAset3]
@item CAset2, CAset3 (@var{Array I1 I2 Value})
sets the element (@var{I1}, @var{I2}) of
the two-dimensional array @var{Array} to @var{Value} and returns @var{Value}.
@var{I1} and @var{I2} should be fixnums. CAset3 sets the element (@var{I1}, @var{I2},
@var{I3}).

@cindex [Bit-Bash]
@item Bit-Bash (@var{V1 V2 V3 Op})
@var{V1}, @var{V2}, and @var{V3} should be bit-vectors
and @var{Op} should be a fixnum.        The elements of the bit vector @var{V3} are
filled with the result of @var{Op}'ing the corresponding elements of @var{V1} and
@var{V2}. @var{Op} should be a Boole-style number (see the Boole miscop in
section @ref{Boole-Section}).
@end table

The rest of the miscops in this section implement special cases of sequence or
string operations.      Where an operand is referred to as a string, it may
actually be an 8-bit I-Vector or system area pointer.

@table @code
@cindex [Byte-BLT]
@item Byte-BLT (@var{Src-String Src-Start Dst-String Dst-Start Dst-End})

moves bytes from @var{Src-String} into @var{Dst-String} between @var{Dst-Start}
(inclusive) and @var{Dst-End} (exclusive). @var{Dst-Start} - @var{Dst-End} bytes are
moved.  If the substrings specified overlap, ``the right thing happens,'' i.e.
all the characters are moved to the right place. This miscop corresponds
to the Common Lisp function REPLACE when the sequences are simple-strings.

@cindex [Find-Character]
@item Find-Character (@var{String Start End Character})

searches @var{String} for the @var{Character} from @var{Start} to @var{End}. If the
character is found, the corresponding index into @var{String} is returned,
otherwise NIL is returned. This miscop corresponds to the Common Lisp
function FIND when the sequence is a simple-string.

@cindex [Find-Character-With-Attribute]
@item Find-Character-With-Attribute (@var{String Start End Table Mask})

The codes of the characters of @var{String} from @var{Start} to @var{End} are used as
indices into the @var{Table}, which is an I-Vector of 8-bit bytes. When the
number picked up from the table bitwise ANDed with @var{Mask} is non-zero, the
current index into the @var{String} is returned.

@cindex [SXHash-Simple-String]
@item SXHash-Simple-String (@var{String Length})
Computes the hash code of the first
@var{Length} characters of @var{String} and pushes it on the stack. This
corresponds to the Common Lisp function SXHASH when the object is a
simple-string.  The @var{Length} operand can be Nil, in which case the length of
the string is calculated in assembler.
@end table

@subsection [Type Predicates]

Many of the miscops described in this sub-section can be coded in-line rather
than as miscops. In particular, all the predicates on basic types are coded
in-line with default optimization settings in the compiler. Currently, all of
these predicates set the eq condition code bit to return an indication of
whether the predicate is true or false. This is so that the
DinkyMachine branch instructions can be used directly without having to
test for NIL. However, this only works if the value of the predicate is needed
for a branching decision. In the cases where the value is actually needed, T
or NIL is generated in-line according to whether the predicate is true or
false. At some point it might be worthwhile having two versions of these
predicates, one which sets the eq condition code bit, and one which returns T
or NIL. This is especially true if space becomes an issue.

@table @code
@cindex [Bit-Vector-P]
@item Bit-Vector-P (@var{Object})
sets the eq condition code bit to 1 if @var{Object} is
a Common Lisp bit-vector or 0 if it is not.

@cindex [Simple-Bit-Vector-P]
@item Simple-Bit-Vector-P (@var{Object})
sets the eq condition code bit to 1 if
@var{Object} is a CMU Common Lisp bit-vector or 0 if it is not.

@cindex [Simple-Integer-Vector-P]
@item Simple-Integer-Vector-P (@var{Object})
sets the eq condition code bit to 1
if @var{Object} is a CMU Common Lisp I-Vector or 0 if it is not.

@cindex [StringP]
@item StringP (@var{Object})
sets the eq condition code bit to 1 if @var{Object} is a
Common Lisp string or 0 if it is not.

@cindex [Simple-String-P]
@item Simple-String-P (@var{Object})
sets the eq condition code bit to 1 if
@var{Object} is a CMU Common Lisp string or 0 if it is not.

@cindex [BignumP]
@item BignumP (@var{Object})
sets the eq condition code bit to 1 if @var{Object} is a
bignum or 0 if it is not.

@cindex [Long-Float-P]
@item Long-Float-P (@var{Object})
sets the eq condition code bit to 1 if
@var{Object} is a long-float or 0 if it is not.

@cindex [ComplexP]
@item ComplexP (@var{Object})
sets the eq condition code bit to 1 if @var{Object} is a
complex number or 0 if it is not.

@cindex [RatioP]
@item RatioP (@var{Object})
sets the eq condition code bit to 1 if @var{Object} is a
ratio or 0 if it is not.

@cindex [IntegerP]
@item IntegerP (@var{Object})
sets the eq condition code bit to 1 if @var{Object} is a
fixnum or bignum or 0 if it is not.

@cindex [RationalP]
@item RationalP (@var{Object})
sets the eq condition code bit to 1 if @var{Object} is a
fixnum, bignum, or ratio or 0 if it is not.

@cindex [FloatP]
@item FloatP (@var{Object})
sets the eq condition code bit to 1 if @var{Object} is a
short-float or long-float or 0 if it is not.

@cindex [NumberP]
@item NumberP (@var{Object})
sets the eq condition code bit to 1 if @var{Object} is a
number or 0 if it is not.

@cindex [General-Vector-P]
@item General-Vector-P (@var{Object})
sets the eq condition code bit to 1 if
@var{Object} is a Common Lisp general vector or 0 if it is not.

@cindex [Simple-Vector-P]
@item Simple-Vector-P (@var{Object})
sets the eq condition code bit to 1 if @var{Object}
is a CMU Common Lisp G-Vector or 0 if it is not.

@cindex [Compiled-Function-P]
@item Compiled-Function-P (@var{Object})
sets the eq condition code bit to 1 if
@var{Object} is a compiled function or 0 if it is not.

@cindex [ArrayP]
@item ArrayP (@var{Object})
sets the eq condition code bit to 1 if @var{Object} is a
Common Lisp array or 0 if it is not.

@cindex [VectorP]
@item VectorP (@var{Object})
sets the eq condition code bit to 1 if @var{Object} is a
Common Lisp vector of 0 if it is not.

@cindex [Complex-Array-P]
@item Complex-Array-P (@var{Object})
sets the eq condition code bit to 1 if @var{Object}
is a CMU Common Lisp array or 0 if it is not.

@cindex [SymbolP]
@item SymbolP (@var{Object})
sets the eq condition code bit to 1 if @var{Object} is a
symbol or 0 if it is not.

@cindex [ListP]
@item ListP (@var{Object})
sets the eq condition code bit to 1 if @var{Object} is a cons
or NIL or 0 if it is not.

@cindex [ConsP]
@item ConsP (@var{Object})
sets the eq condition code bit to 1 if @var{Object} is a cons
or 0 if it is not.

@cindex [FixnumP]
@item FixnumP (@var{Object})
sets the eq condition code bit to 1 if @var{Object} is a
fixnum or 0 if it is not.

@cindex [Single-Float-P]
@item Single-Float-P (@var{Object})
sets the eq condition code bit to 1 if @var{Object}
is a single-float or 0 if it is not.

@cindex [CharacterP]
@item CharacterP (@var{Object})
sets the eq condition code bit to 1 if @var{Object} is
a character or 0 if it is not.
@end table

@subsection [Arithmetic]

@table @code
@cindex [Integer-Length]
@item Integer-Length (@var{Object})
returns the integer-length (as defined in the
Common Lisp manual) of the integer @var{Object}.

@cindex [Logcount]
@item Logcount (@var{Object})
returns the number of 1's if @var{object} is a
positive integer, the number of 0's if @var{object} is a negative integer,
and signals an error otherwise.

@cindex [Float-Short]
@item Float-Short (@var{Object})
returns a short-float corresponding to the number
@var{Object}.

@cindex [Float-Long]
@item Float-Long (@var{Number})
returns a long float formed by coercing @var{Number} to
a long float. This corresponds to the Common Lisp function Float when given a
long float as its second argument.

@cindex [Realpart]
@item Realpart (@var{Number})
returns the realpart of the @var{Number}.

@cindex [Imagpart]
@item Imagpart (@var{Number})
returns the imagpart of the @var{Number}.

@cindex [Numerator]
@item Numerator (@var{Number})
returns the numerator of the rational @var{Number}.

@cindex [Denominator]
@item Denominator (@var{Number})
returns the denominator of the rational @var{Number}.

@cindex [Decode-Float]
@item Decode-Float (@var{Number})
performs the Common Lisp Decode-Float function,
returning 3 values.

@cindex [Scale-Float]
@item Scale-Float (@var{Number X})
performs the Common Lisp Scale-Float function,
returning the result.


@end table



@node Boole-Section

@table @code

@cindex [=]
@item = (@var{X Y})
sets the condition codes according to whether @var{X} is equal
to @var{Y}. Both @var{X} and @var{Y} must be numbers, otherwise an error is
signalled. If a rational is compared with a flonum, the rational is
converted to a flonum of the same type first. If a short flonum is compared
with a long flonum, the short flonum is converted to a long flonum.
Flonums must be exactly equal (after conversion) for the condition codes to
be set to equality. This miscop also deals with complex numbers.

@cindex [Compare]
@item Compare (@var{X Y})
sets the condition codes according to
whether @var{X} is less than, equal to, or greater than @var{Y}. @var{X}
and @var{Y} must be numbers. Conversions as described in = above are done
as necessary. This miscop replaces the < and > instructions on the Perq,
so that the branch on condition instructions can be used more
effectively. The value of < and > as defined for the Perq are
only generated if necessary, i.e., the result is saved. If @var{X} or @var{Y}
is a complex number, an error is signalled.

@cindex [Truncate]
@item Truncate (@var{N X})
performs the Common Lisp TRUNCATE operation. There are 3
cases depending on @var{X}:

@itemize
@item If @var{X} is fixnum 1, return two items: a fixnum or bignum
representing the integer part of @var{N} (rounded toward 0), then either 0 if
@var{N} was already an integer or the fractional part of @var{N} represented as a
flonum or ratio with the same type as @var{N}.

@item If @var{X} and @var{N} are both fixnums or bignums and @var{X} is not 1, divide
@var{N} by @var{X}. Return two items: the integer quotient (a fixnum or
bignum) and the integer remainder.

@item If either @var{X} or @var{N} is a flonum or ratio, return a fixnum or bignum
quotient (the true quotient rounded toward 0), then a flonum or ratio
remainder. The type of the remainder is determined by the same type-coercion
rules as for +. The value of the remainder is equal to @var{N} - @var{X} *
@var{Quotient}.
@end itemize

On the DinkyMachine, the integer part is returned in register A0, and
the remainder in A1.

@cindex [+]
@cindex [-]
@cindex [*]
@cindex [/]
@item +, -, *, / (@var{N X})
returns  @var{N} + @var{X}. -, *, and / are similar.

@cindex [Fixnum*Fixnum]
@cindex [Fixnum/Fixnum]
@item Fixnum*Fixnum, Fixnum/Fixnum (@var{N X})
returns @var{N} * @var{X}, where
both @var{N} and @var{X} are fixnums. Fixnum/ is similar.

@cindex [1+]
@item 1+ (@var{E})
returns @var{E} + 1.

@cindex [1-]
@item 1- (@var{E})
returns @var{E} - 1.

@cindex [Negate]
@item Negate (@var{N})
returns -@var{N}.

@cindex [Abs]
@item Abs (@var{N})
returns |@var{N}|.

@cindex [GCD]
@item GCD (@var{N X})
returns the greatest common divisor of the integers @var{N} and @var{X}.

@cindex [Logand]
@cindex [Logior]
@cindex [Logxor]
@item Logand (@var{N X})
returns the bitwise and of the integers @var{N} and @var{X}.
Logior and Logxor are analogous.

@cindex [Lognot]
@item Lognot (@var{N})
returns the bitwise complement of @var{N}.

@cindex [Boole]

@item Boole (@var{Op X Y})
performs the Common Lisp Boole operation @var{Op} on @var{X},
and @var{Y}. The Boole constants for CMU Common Lisp are these:

@verbatim
        boole-clr       0
        boole-set       1
        boole-1         2
        boole-2         3
        boole-c1        4
        boole-c2        5
        boole-and       6
        boole-ior       7
        boole-xor       8
        boole-eqv       9
        boole-nand      10
        boole-nor       11
        boole-andc1     12
        boole-andc2     13
        boole-orc1      14
        boole-orc2      15
@end verbatim

@cindex [Ash]

@item Ash (@var{N X})
performs the Common Lisp ASH operation on @var{N} and @var{X}.

@cindex [Ldb]
@item Ldb (@var{S P N})
All args are integers; @var{S} and @var{P} are non-negative.
Performs the Common Lisp LDB operation with @var{S} and @var{P} being the size and
position of the byte specifier.

@cindex [Mask-Field]
@item Mask-Field (@var{S P N})
performs the Common Lisp Mask-Field operation with
@var{S} and @var{P} being the size and position of the byte specifier.

@cindex [Dpb]
@item Dpb (@var{V S P N})
performs the Common Lisp DPB operation with @var{S} and @var{P}
being the size and position of the byte specifier.

@cindex [Deposit-Field]
@item Deposit-Field (@var{V S P N})
performs the Common Lisp Deposit-Field operation
with @var{S} and @var{P} as the size and position of the byte specifier.

@cindex [Lsh]
@item Lsh (@var{N X})
returns a fixnum that is @var{N} shifted left by @var{X} bits, with
0's shifted in on the right. If @var{X} is negative, @var{N} is shifted to the
right with 0's coming in on the left. Both @var{N} and @var{X} should be fixnums.

@cindex [Logldb]
@item Logldb (@var{S P N})
All args are fixnums. @var{S} and @var{P} specify a ``byte''
or bit-field of any length within @var{N}. This is extracted and is returned
right-justified as a fixnum. @var{S} is the length of the field in bits; @var{P}
is the number of bits from the right of @var{N} to the beginning of the
specified field. @var{P} = 0 means that the field starts at bit 0 of @var{N}, and
so on.  It is an error if the specified field is not entirely within the 26
bits of @var{N}

@cindex [Logdpb]
@item Logdpb (@var{V S P N})
All args are fixnums. Returns a number equal to @var{N},
but with the field specified by @var{P} and @var{S} replaced by the @var{S} low-order
bits of @var{V}.        It is an error if the field does not fit into the 26 bits of
@var{N}.

@cindex [Sin]
@cindex [Cos]
@cindex [Tan]
@cindex [Atan]
@item Sin(@var{X}), Cos(@var{X}), Tan(@var{X}), and Atan(@var{X})
accept a single number
@var{X} as argument and return the sine, cosine, tangent, and arctangent of
the number respectively. These miscops take advantage of the hardware
support provided on the IBM RT PC if it is available, otherwise they escape
to Lisp code to calculate the appropriate result.

@cindex [Log]
@item Log(@var{X})
returns the natural log of the number @var{X}. This miscop uses
the hardware operation if it is available, otherwise it escapes to Lisp
code to calculate the result.

@cindex [Exp]
@item Exp(@var{X})
returns e raised to the power @var{X}. This miscop uses the
hardware operation if it is available, otherwise it escapes to Lisp code to
calculate the result.

@cindex [Sqrt]
@item Sqrt(@var{X})
returns the square root of @var{X}. This miscop uses the
hardware operation if it is available, otherwise it escapes to Lisp code to
calculate the result.
@end table

@subsection [Branching]
All branching is done with DinkyMachine branch instructions.
Instructions are generated to set the condition code bits appropriately, and
a branch which tests the appropriate condition code bit is generated.

@subsection [Function Call and Return]

@table @code
@cindex [Call]
@item Call()
A call frame for a function is opened.  This is explained in
more detail in the next chapter.

@cindex [Call-0]
@item Call-0 (@var{F})
@var{F} must be an executable function, but is a
function of 0 arguments. Thus, there is no need to collect arguments.   The
call frame is opened and activated in a single miscop.

@cindex [Call-Multiple]
@item Call-Multiple ()
Just like a Call miscop, but it marks the frame
to indicate that multiple values will be accepted. See
section @ref{Multi}.

@cindex [Set-Up-Apply-Args]
@item Set-Up-Apply-Args ()
is called to handle the last argument of a
function called by apply. All the other arguments will have been
properly set up by this time. Set-up-apply-args places the values of
the list passed as the last argument to apply in their proper
locations, whether they belong in argument registers or on the stack.
It updates the NArgs register with the actual count of the arguments
being passed to the function. When Set-up-apply-args returns, all the
arguments to the function being applied are in their correct
locations, and the function can be invoked normally.

@cindex [Start-Call-Interpreter]
@item Start-Call-Interpreter (@var{NArgs})
is called from the interpreter to
start a function call. It accepts the number of arguments that are
pushed on the stack in register A0. Just below the arguments is the
function to call; just below the function is the area to store the
preserved registers. This miscop sets up the argument registers
correctly, moves any other arguments down on the stack to their
proper place, and invokes the function.

@cindex [Invoke1]
@item Invoke1 (@var{Function} @var{Argument})
is similar to Start-Call-Interpreter,
but is simpler, since the @var{Function} is being called with only a
single @var{Argument}.

@cindex [Invoke1*]
@item Invoke1* (@var{Function} @var{Argument})
is similar to Invoke1, but the
@var{Function} being called is called for one value, rather than multiple ones.

@cindex [Start-call-mc]
@item Start-call-mc ()
is called when the compiler generates code for the
form multiple-value-call. Register A0 contains the function to be
called, A1 contains a 0 if the call if for a single value, and 1
otherwise, NArgs contains the number of arguments that are stored on
the stack. The argument registers are set up correctly, and the
excess values moved down on the stack if necessary. Finally, the
function is actually invoked.

@cindex [Push-Last]
@item Push-Last ()
closes the currently open call frame, and initiates a function
call.

@cindex [Return]
@item Return (@var{X})
Return from the current function call.  After the current
frame is popped off the stack, @var{X} is returned in register A0 as the result
Being returned. See section @ref{Return} for more details.

@cindex [Return-From]
@item Return-From (@var{X} @var{F})
is similar to Return, except it accepts the frame
to return from as an additional argument.

@cindex [Return-1-Value-Any-Bind]
@item Return-1-Value-Any-Bind (@var{X})
is similar to return, except only
one value is returned. Any number of bindings are undone during the
return operation.

@cindex [Return-Mult-Value-0-Bind]
@item Return-Mult-Value-0-Bind (@var{X})
is similar to return, except multiple values
may be returned, but the binding stack does not have to be popped.

@cindex [Link-Address-Fixup]
@item Link-Address-Fixup (@var{Symbol NArgs Code-Vector Offset})
finds the
correct link table entry for @var{Symbol} with @var{NArgs} (@var{NArgs}
specifies the fixed number of arguments and a flag if more may be
passed). It smashes the @var{Code-Vector} at @var{Offset} to generate
code to point at the absolute address of the link table entry.

@cindex [Miscop-Fixup]
@item Miscop-Fixup (@var{Code-Vector Offset Index})
smashes @var{Code-Vector} at
@var{Offset} with the correct value for the miscop specified by @var{Index} in a
transfer vector of all the miscops.

@cindex [Make-Compiled-Closure]
@item Make-Compiled-Closure (@var{env fcn offset})
returns a new function object
that is a copy of the function object @var{fcn} which has the @var{env}
information stored at @var{offset}. Compiled lexical closures are now
represented as real function objects rather than as lists. This miscop is
necessary to support this change.

@cindex [Reset-link-table]
@item Reset-link-table (@var{function})
resets all the link table entries for
@var{function} to the default action. This is necessary because Portable
Commonloops updates generic function objects by copying new information
into the function object. The link table must be updated to reflect this
or the wrong function will be called.

@cindex [Interrupt-Handler]


@item Interrupt-Handler (@var{Signal Code Signal-Context})
gets the first
indication that a Unix signal has occurred. This miscop does not follow
the normal Lisp calling conventions at all. Instead it follows the
standard IBM RT PC calling conventions for C or other algorithmic
languages. On entry the registers are as follows:

@table @code
@item R0
Pointer to C data area for Interrupt-Handler. Currently this data area
only holds a pointer to the entry point for Interrupt-Handler and nothing
else.

@item R1
Pointer to a C stack that contains information about the signal.

@item R2
Contains the @var{Signal} number that caused the interrupt to happen.

@item R3
Contains the @var{Code} that further specifies what caused the interrupt
(if necessary).

@item R4
Contains a pointer to the @var{signal-context} which contains
information about where the interrupt occurred, the saved registers, etc.

@item R5-R14
Contain unknown values.

@item R15
is the return PC which will return from the interrupt handler and
restart the computation.

@end table

Interrupt-Handler determines whether it is safe to take the interrupt now,
i.e., it is executing in Lisp code, C code,  or an interruptible miscop. An
interruptible miscop is one that has been specially written to make sure
that it is safe to interrupt it at any point and is possible that it will
never return of its own accord (e.g., length which could be passed a
circular list, some of the system call miscops, etc.). If it is safe to
take the interrupt, the signal-context is modified so that control will
transfer to the miscop interrupt-routine when the interrupt-handler returns
normally (i.e., after the kernel has done the necessary bookkeeping). If
it is unsafe to take the interrupt (i.e., it is executing in an
non-interruptible miscop), then the return PC of the miscop is modified to
be interrupt-routine and interrupt-handler returns to the kernel. In
either case interrupts are disabled and information is stored in a global
Lisp data area, so that the interrupt-routine miscop can retrieve the
important information about the interrupt.

@item Interrupt-Routine ()
gets control when it is safe to take an interrupt.
It saves the current state of the computation on the appropriate stack (on
the C stack if it was executing in C or on the Lisp stack if in Lisp)
including all the registers, some control information specifying whether
the computation was in C code, Lisp code, whether it should form a PC in
register R15. When a PC has to be formed in R15, R14 will contain a pointer
to the active function and R15 will contain an index into the code vector
associated with the active function. Reforming the PC is necessary so
it is possible to restart a computation even after a garbage collection
may have moved the function. Once this information is stored,
interrupt-routine invokes the Lisp function %sp-software-interrupt-routine
which moves the processing of the interrupt to Lisp code.

@cindex [Break-Return]
@item Break-Return (@var{})
returns from a function called by the
interrupt-routine miscop. The only function that should ever do this is
%sp-software-interrupt-routine. This miscop expects the stack to be in a
format that is generated during an interrupt and should not be used for
anything else.

@cindex [Catch]
@item Catch (@var{Tag PC})
builds a catch frame. @var{Tag} is the tag caught by this
catch frame, @var{PC} is a saved-format PC (i.e., an index into the current code
vector). See section @ref{Catch} for details.

@cindex [Catch-Multiple]
@item Catch-Multiple (@var{Tag PC})
builds a multiple-value catch frame. @var{Tag} is
the tag caught by this catch frame, and @var{PC} is a saved-format PC. See
section @ref{Catch} for details.

@cindex [Catch-All]
@item Catch-All (@var{PC})
builds a catch frame whose tag is the special Catch-All
object. @var{PC} is the saved-format PC, which is the address to branch to if
this frame is thrown through. See section @ref{Catch} for details.

@cindex [Throw]
@item Throw (@var{X Tag})
@var{Tag} is the throw-tag, normally a symbol. @var{X} is the
value to be returned. See section @ref{Catch} for a description of how this
miscop works.

@cindex [Rest-Entry-0]
@cindex [Rest-Entry-1]
@cindex [Rest-Entry-2]
@cindex [Rest-Entry]
@item Rest-Entry-0, Rest-Entry-1, Rest-Entry-2, Rest-Entry
are miscops
that do the processing for a function at its &rest entry point.
Rest-Entry-@var{i} are miscops that are invoked by functions that have
0, 1, or 2 arguments before the &rest argument. Rest-entry is
invoked for all other cases, and is passed an additional argument in
A3 which is the number of non-&rest arguments. These miscops form
the &rest arg list and set up all the registers to have the
appropriate values. In particular, the non-&rest arguments are copied
into preserved registers, and the &rest arg list is built and stored
in the appropriate preserved register or on the stack as appropriate.

@cindex [Call-Foreign]
@item Call-Foreign (@var{C-Function Arguments NArgs})
establishes the C
environment so that C code can be called correctly. @var{C-Function} is a
pointer to the data area for a C function, the first word of which is a
pointer to the entry point of the C function. @var{Arguments} is a block of
storage that contains the @var{NArgs} arguments to be passed to the C
function. The first four of these arguments are passed in registers R2
through R5 respectively, the rest are moved onto the C stack in the proper
location. When the C function returns, Call-Foreign restores the Lisp
environment and returns as its value the integer in R2.

@cindex [Call-Lisp]
@item Call-Lisp (@var{Arg@-<1> ... Arg@-<2>})
is a Lisp miscop that gets control
when a C function needs to call a Lisp function. Lisp provides a mechanism
for setting up an object that looks like a C procedure pointer. The code
pointer in this object always points at Call-Lisp. Additional data in this
procedure pointer is the Lisp function to call and the number of arguments
that it should be called with. Call-Lisp restores the Lisp environment,
saves the state of the C computation, moves the C arguments into the
correct places for a call to a Lisp function and then invokes the special
Lisp function call-lisp-from-c. This Lisp function actually invokes the
correct Lisp function. Call-Lisp never regains control.

@cindex [Return-To-C]
@item Return-To-C (@var{C-Stack-Pointer Value})
is used in the
function call-lisp-from-c to return control to C from a Lisp function
called by C. @var{C-Stack-Pointer} is the C stack pointer when the call-lisp
miscop got control. The C stack pointer argument is used to restore the C
environment to what it was at the time the call to Lisp was made.
@var{Value} is the value returned from Lisp and is passed back to C in
register R2. Currently, it is not possible to return other than a single
32 bit quantity.

@cindex [Reset-C-Stack]
@item Reset-C-Stack ()
is invoked when a Lisp function called by C throws out
past where it should return to C. Reset-C-Stack restores the C stack to
what it was before the original call to C happened. This is so that in the
future, the C stack will not contain any garbage that should not be there.

@cindex [Set-C-Procedure-Pointer]
@item Set-C-Procedure-Pointer (@var{Sap} @var{I} @var{Proc})
sets the @var{I/2}'th
element of @var{sap} to be the data part of the statically allocated g-vector
@var{Proc}. This is used to set up a C procedure argument in the argument
block that is passed to call-foreign.

@end table

@subsection [Miscellaneous]

@table @code
@cindex [Eq]
@item Eq (@var{X Y})
sets the eq condition code bit to 1 if @var{X} and @var{Y} are the
same object, 0 otherwise.

@cindex [Eql]
@item Eql (@var{X Y})
sets the eq condition code bit to 1 if @var{X} and @var{Y} are the
same object or if
@var{X} and @var{Y} are numbers of the same type with the same value, 0 otherwise.

@cindex [Make-Predicate]
@item Make-Predicate (@var{X})
returns NIL if @var{X} is NIL or T if it is not.

@cindex [Not-Predicate]
@item Not-Predicate (@var{X})
returns T if @var{X} is NIL or NIL if it is not.

@cindex [Values-To-N]
@item Values-To-N (@var{V})
@var{V} must be a Values-Marker. Returns the number
of values indicated in the low 24 bits of @var{V} as a fixnum.

@cindex [N-To-Values]
@item N-To-Values (@var{N})
@var{N} is a fixnum. Returns a Values-Marker with the
same low-order 24 bits as @var{N}.

@cindex [Force-Values]
@item Force-Values (@var{VM})
If the @var{VM} is a Values-Marker, do
nothing; if not, push @var{VM} and return a Values-Marker 1.

@cindex [Flush-Values]
@item Flush-Values (@var{})
is a no-op for the DinkyMachine, since the only
time that a Flush-Values miscop is generated is in some well-defined cases
where all the values are wanted on the stack.
@end table

@node System-Hacking-Instructions
@subsection System Hacking

@table @code
@cindex [Get-Type]
@item Get-Type (@var{Object})
returns the five type bits of the @var{Object} as a
fixnum.

@cindex [Get-Space]
@item Get-Space (@var{Object})
returns the two space bits of @var{Object} as a
fixnum.

@cindex [Make-Immediate-Type]
@item Make-Immediate-Type (@var{X A})
returns an object whose type bits are the
integer @var{A} and whose other bits come from the immediate object or pointer
@var{X}.        @var{A} should be an immediate type code.

@cindex [8bit-System-Ref]
@item 8bit-System-Ref (@var{X I})
@var{X} must be a system area pointer, returns
the @var{I}'th byte of @var{X}, indexing into @var{X} directly. @var{I}
must be a fixnum.

@cindex [8bit-System-Set]
@item 8bit-System-Set (@var{X I V})
@var{X} must be a system area pointer, sets the
@var{I}'th element of @var{X} to @var{V}, indexing into @var{X} directly.

@cindex [16bit-System-Ref]
@item 16bit-System-Ref (@var{X I})
@var{X} must be a system area pointer, returns the
@var{I}'th 16-bit word of @var{X}, indexing into @var{X} directly.

@cindex [Signed-16bit-System-Ref]
@item Signed-16bit-System-Ref (@var{X I})
@var{X} must be a system area pointer,
returns the @var{I}'th 16-bit word of @var{X} extending the high order bit as
the sign bit.

@cindex [16bit-System-Set]
@item 16bit-System-Set (@var{X I V})
@var{X} must be a system area pointer, sets the
@var{I}'th element of @var{X} to @var{V}, indexing into @var{X} directly.

@cindex [Signed-32bit-System-Ref]
@item Signed-32bit-System-Ref (@var{X I})
@var{X} must be a system area pointer and
@var{I} an even fixnum, returns the @var{I}/2'th 32 bit word as a signed
quantity.

@cindex [Unsigned-32bit-System-Ref]
@item Unsigned-32bit-System-Ref (@var{X I})
@var{X} must be a system area pointer and
@var{I} an even fixnum, returns the @var{I}/2'th 32 bit word as an unsigned
quantity.

@cindex [Signed-32bit-System-Set]
@item Signed-32bit-System-Set (@var{X I V})
@var{X} must be a system area pointer,
@var{I} an even fixnum, and @var{V} an integer, sets the @var{I}/2'th element of
@var{X} to @var{V}.

@cindex [Sap-System-Ref]
@item Sap-System-Ref (@var{X I})
@var{X} must be a system area pointer and @var{I} and
even fixnum, returns the @var{I}/2'th element of @var{X} as a system area
pointer.

@cindex [Sap-System-Set]
@item Sap-System-Set (@var{X I V})
@var{X} and @var{V} must be a system area pointers
and @var{I} an even fixnum, sets the @var{I}/2'th element of @var{X} to @var{V}.

@cindex [Pointer-System-Set]
@item Pointer-System-Set (@var{X I})
@var{X} must be a system area pointer, @var{I} an
even fixnum, and @var{V} a pointer (either system area pointer or Lisp
pointer), sets the @var{I}/2'th element of @var{X} to the pointer @var{V}. If
the pointer is a Lisp pointer, the pointer stored is to the first word of
data (i.e., the header word(s) are bypassed).

@cindex [Sap-Int]
@item Sap-Int (@var{X})
@var{X} should be a system area pointer, returns a Lisp
integer containing the system area pointer. This miscop is useful when it
is necessary to do arithmetic on system area pointers.

@cindex [Int-Sap]
@item Int-Sap (@var{X})
@var{X} should be an integer (fixnum or bignum), returns a
system area pointer. This miscop performs the inverse operation of sap-int.

@cindex [Check-<=]
@item Check-<= (@var{X} @var{Y})
checks to make sure that @var{X} is less than or
equal to @var{Y}. If not, then check-<= signals an error, otherwise it just
returns.

@cindex [Collect-Garbage]
@item Collect-Garbage (@var{})
causes a stop-and-copy GC to be performed.

@cindex [Purify]
@item Purify (@var{})
is similar to collect-garbage, except it copies Lisp objects
into static or read-only space. This miscop needs Lisp level code to get
the process started by putting some root structures into the correct space.

@cindex [Newspace-Bit]
@item Newspace-Bit (@var{})
returns 0 if newspace is currently space 0 or 1 if it is
1.

@cindex [Save]
@item Save (@var{*current-alien-free-pointer*} @var{Checksum} @var{memory})
Save takes
a snap short of the current state of the Lisp computation. The value of
the symbol *Current-alien-free-pointer* must be passed to save, so that it
can save the static alien data structures. The parameter @var{checksum}
specifies whether a checksum should be generated for the saved image.
Currently, this parameter is ignored and no checksum is generated. The
parameter @var{memory} should be be a pointer to a block of memory where the
saved core image will be stored. Save returns the size of the core image
generated.

@cindex [Syscall0]
@cindex [Syscall1]
@cindex [Syscall2]
@cindex [Syscall3]
@cindex [Syscall4]
@cindex [Syscall]
Syscall0 Syscall1 Syscall2 Syscall3 Syscall4 Syscall (@var{number}
@item @var{arg@-<1> ... arg@-<n>})
is for making syscalls to the Mach kernel. The
argument @var{number} should be the number of the syscall. Syscall0 accepts
no arguments to the syscall; syscall1 accepts one argument to the syscall,
etc. Syscall accepts five or more arguments to the syscall.

@cindex [Unix-write]
@item Unix-Write (@var{fd buffer offset length})
performs a Unix write syscall to
the file descriptor @var{fd}. @var{Buffer} should contain the data to be
written;  @var{Offset} should be an offset into buffer from which to start
writing; and @var{length} is the number of bytes of data to write.

@cindex [Unix-fork]
@item Unix-Fork ()
performs a Unix fork operation returning one or two values.
If an error occurred, the value -1 and the error code is returned. If no
error occurred, 0 is returned in the new process and the process id of the
child process is returned in the parent process.

@cindex [Arg-In-Frame]

@item Arg-In-Frame (@var{N F})
@var{N} is a fixnum, @var{F} is a
control stack pointer as returned by the Active-Call-Frame miscop. It
returns the item in slot @var{N} of the args-and-locals area of call frame
@var{F}.

@cindex [Active-Call-Frame]
@item Active-Call-Frame (@var{})
returns a control-stack pointer to the start of the
currently active call frame. This will be of type Control-Stack-Pointer.

@cindex [Active-Catch-Frame]
@item Active-Catch-Frame (@var{})
returns the control-stack pointer to the start of
the currently active catch frame. This is Nil if there is no active catch.

@cindex [Set-Call-Frame]
@item Set-Call-Frame (@var{P})
@var{P} must be a control stack pointer.        This becomes
the current active call frame pointer.

@cindex [Current-Stack-Pointer]
@item Current-Stack-Pointer (@var{})
returns the Control-Stack-Pointer that points
to the current top of the stack (before the result of this operation is
pushed). Note: by definition, this points to the
to the last thing pushed.

@cindex [Current-Binding-Pointer]
@item Current-Binding-Pointer (@var{})
returns a Binding-Stack-Pointer that points
to the first word above the current top of the binding stack.

@cindex [Read-Control-Stack]
@item Read-Control-Stack (@var{F})
@var{F} must be a control stack pointer. Returns
the Lisp object that resides at this location.  If the addressed object is
totally outside the current stack, this is an error.

@cindex [Write-Control-Stack]
@item Write-Control-Stack (@var{F V})
@var{F} is a stack pointer, @var{V} is any Lisp
object. Writes @var{V} into the location addressed. If the addressed cell is
totally outside the current stack, this is an error. Obviously, this should
only be used by carefully written and debugged system code, since you can
destroy the world by using this miscop.

@cindex [Read-Binding-Stack]
@item Read-Binding-Stack (@var{B})
@var{B} must be a binding stack pointer. Reads and
returns the Lisp object at this location. An error if the location specified
is outside the current binding stack.

@cindex [Write-Binding-Stack]
@item Write-Binding-Stack (@var{B V})
@var{B} must be a binding stack pointer. Writes
@var{V} into the specified location. An error if the location specified is
outside the current binding stack.
@end table

@node Control-Conventions
@chapter Control Conventions
@cindex Hairy stuff

@section Function Calls
@cindex Call
@cindex Call-0
@cindex Call-Multiple

On the Perq function calling is done by micro-coded instructions. The
instructions perform a large number of operations, including determining
whether the function being called is compiled or interpreted, determining that
a legal number of arguments are passed, and branching to the correct entry
point in the function. To do all this on the DinkyMachine would
involve a large amount of computation.  In the general case, it is necessary to
do all this, but in some common cases, it is possible to short circuit most of
this work.

To perform a function call in the general case, the following steps occur:

@enumerate

@item Allocate space on the control stack for the fix-sized part of a call
frame. This space will be used to store all the registers that must
be preserved across a function call.

@item Arguments to the function are now evaluated. The first three
arguments are stored in the argument registers A0, A1, and A2. The
rest of the arguments are stored on the stack as they are evaluated.
Note that during the evaluation of arguments, the argument registers
may be used and may have to be stored in local variables and restored
just before the called function is invoked.

@item Load R0 with the argument count.

@item Load the PC register with the offset into the current code vector of
the place to return to when the function call is complete.

@item If this call is for multiple values, mark the frame as accepting
multiple values, by making the fixnum offset above negative by oring
in the negative fixnum type code.

@item Store all the registers that must be preserved over the function call in the
current frame.

@end enumerate

At this point, all the arguments are set up and all the registers have been
saved.  All the code to this point is done inline. If the object being called
as a function is a symbol, we get the definition from the definition cell of
the symbol. If this definition is the trap object, an undefined symbol error
is generated. The function calling mechanism diverges at this point depending
on the type of function being called, i.e., whether it is a compiled function
object or a list.

If we have a compiled function object, the following steps are performed (this
code is out of line):

@enumerate
Load the active function register with a pointer to the compiled function
object.

The active frame register is set to the start of the current frame.

Note the number of arguments evaluated. Let this be K. The correct
entry point in the called function's code vector must be computed as
a function of K and the number of arguments the called function
wants:

@enumerate
If K < minimum number of arguments, signal an error.

If K > maximum number of arguments and there is no &rest argument,
signal an error.

If K > maximum number of arguments and there is a &rest argument,
start at offset 0 in the code vector. This entry point must collect
the excess arguments into a list and leave the &rest argument in the
appropriate argument register or on the stack as appropriate.

If K is between the minimum and maximum arguments (inclusive), get
the starting offset from the appropriate slot of the called
function's function object. This is stored as a fixnum in slot K -
MIN + 6 of the function object.
@end enumerate

Load one of the Non-Lisp temporary registers with the address of the
code vector and add in the offset calculated above. Then do a branch
register instruction with this register as the operand. The called
function is now executing at the appropriate place.

@end enumerate

If the function being called is a list, %SP-Internal-Apply must be called to
interpret the function with the given arguments. Proceed as follows:

@enumerate
Note the number of arguments evaluated for the current open frame (call this N)
and the frame pointer for the frame (call it F). Also remember the lambda
expression in this frame (call it L).

Load the active function register with the list L.

Load the PC register with 0.

Allocate a frame on the control stack for the call to %SP-Internal-Apply.

Move the contents of the argument registers into the local registers L0, L1,
and L2 respectively.

Store all the preserved registers in the frame.

Place N, F, and L into argument registers A0, A1, and A2 respectively.

Do the equivalent of a start call on %SP-Internal-Apply.

@end enumerate

%SP-Internal-Apply, a function of three arguments,
now evaluates the call to the lambda-expression or interpreted
lexical closure L, obtaining the arguments from the frame pointed to
by F. The first three arguments must be obtained from the frame that
%SP-Internal-Apply runs in, since they are stored in its stack frame
and not on the stack as the rest of the arguments are. Prior to
returning %SP-Internal-Apply sets the Active-Frame register to F, so
that it returns from frame F.

The above is the default calling mechanism. However, much of the
overhead can be reduced. Most of the overhead is incurred by having
to check the legality of the function call everytime the function is
called. In many situations where the function being called is a
symbol, this checking can be done only once per call site by
introducing a data structure called a link table. The one exception
to this rule is when the function apply is used with a symbol. In
this situation, the argument count checks are still necessary, but
checking for whether the function is a list or compiled function
object can be bypassed.

The link table is a hash table whose key is based on the name of the
function, the number of arguments supplied to the call and a flag
specifying whether the call is done through apply or not. Each entry
of the link table consists of two words:

@enumerate
The address of the function object associated with the symbol being
called. This is here, so that double indirection is not needed to
access the function object which must be loaded into the active
function register. Initially, the symbol is stored in this slot.

The address of the instruction in the function being called to start
executing when this table entry is used. Initially, this points to
an out of line routine that checks the legality of the call and
calculates the correct place to jump to in the called function. This
out of line routine replaces the contents of this word with the
correct address it calculated. In the case when the call is caused
by apply, this will often be an out of line routine that checks the
argument count and calculates where to jump. In the case where the
called function accepts &rest arguments and the minimum number of
arguments passed is guaranteed to be greater than the maximum number
of arguments, then a direct branch to the &rest arg entry point is
made.
@end enumerate

When a compiled file is loaded into the lisp environment, all the
entries for the newly loaded functions will be set to an out of line
routine mentioned above. Also, during a garbage collection the
entries in this table must be updated when a function object for a
symbol is moved.

The DinkyMachine code to perform a function call using the link table
becomes:

@smallexample
        cal     CS,CS,%Frame-Size       ; Alloc. space on control st.

        <Code to evaluate arguments to the function>

        cau     NL1,0,high-half-word(lte(function nargs flag))
        oil     NL1,0,low-half-word(lte(function nargs flag))
        cal     PC,0,return-tag         ; Offset into code vector.
       <oiu     PC,PC,#xF800            ; Mark if call-multiple frame>
        stm     L0,CS,-(%Frame-Size-4)  ; Save preserved regs.
        lm      AF,NL1,0                ; Link table entry contents.
        bnbrx   pz,R15                  ; Branch to called routine.
        cal     FP,CS,-(%Frame-Size-4)  ; Get pointer to frame.
return-tag:
@end smallexample

The first two instructions after the arguments are evaled get the
address of the link table entry into a register. The two 16-bit half
word entries are filled in at load time. The rest of the
instructions should be fairly straight forward.

@node Return
@section Returning from a Function Call
@cindex return

Returning from a function call on the Perq is done by a micro-coded
instruction. On the DinkyMachine, return has to do the following:

@enumerate

Pop the binding stack back to the binding stack pointer stored in the frame
we're returning from. For each symbol/value pair popped of the binding stack,
restore that value for the symbol.

Save the current value of the frame pointer in a temporary registers. This
will be used to restore the control stack pointer at the end.

Restore all the registers that are preserved across a function call.

Get a pointer to the code vector for the function we're returning to. This is
retrieved from the code slot of what is now the active function.

Make sure the relative PC (which is now in a register) is positive and add it
to the code vector pointer above, giving the address of the instruction to
return to.

If the function is returning multiple values do a block transfer of all the
return values down over the stack frame just released, i.e., the first return
value should be stored where the temporarily saved frame pointer points to.
In effect the return values can be pushed onto the stack using the saved frame
pointer above as a stack pointer that is incremented everytime a value is
pushed.  Register A0 can be examined to determine the number of values that
must be transferred.

Set the control stack register to the saved frame pointer above. NB: it may
have been updated if multiple values are being returned.

Resume execution of the calling function.
@end enumerate

Again, it is not always necessary to use the general return code. At compile
time it is often possible to determine that no special symbols have to be
unbound and/or only one value is being returned. For example the code to
perform a return when only one value is returned and it is unnecessary to
unbind any special symbols is:

@smallexample
        cas     NL1,FP,0                ; Save frame register.
        lm      L0,FP,0                 ; Restore all preserved regs.
        ls      A3,AF,%function-code    ; Get pointer to code vector.
        niuo    PC,PC,#x07FF            ; Make relative PC positive.
        cas     PC,A3,PC                ; Get addr. of instruction
        bnbrx   pz,PC                   ; to return to and do so while
        cas     CS,NL1,0                ; updating control stack reg.
@end smallexample


@node Multi
@subsection Returning Multiple-Values
@cindex Multiple values

If the current frame can accept multiple values and a values marker is in
register A0 indicating N values on top of the stack, it is necessary to copy
the N return values down to the top of the control stack after the current
frame is popped off. Thus returning multiple values is similar to the
above, but a block transfer is necessary to move the returned values down to
the correct location on the control stack.

In tail recursive situations, such as in the last form of a PROGN, one
function, FOO, may want to call another function, BAR, and return ``whatever
BAR returns.''  Call-Multiple is used in this case. If BAR returns multiple
values, they will all be passed to FOO. If FOO's caller wants multiple values,
the values will be returned. If not, FOO's Return instruction will see that
there are multiple values on the stack, but that multiple values will not be
accepted by FOO's caller. So Return will return only the first value.

@node Catch
@section Non-Local Exits
@cindex Catch
@cindex Throw
@cindex Catch-All object
@cindex Unwind-Protect
@cindex Non-Local Exits

The Catch and Unwind-Protect special forms are implemented using
catch frames. Unwind-Protect builds a catch frame whose tag is the
Catch-All object. The Catch miscop creates a catch frame for a
given tag and PC to branch to in the current instruction. The Throw
miscop looks up the stack by following the chain of catch frames
until it finds a frame with a matching tag or a frame with the
Catch-All object as its tag. If it finds a frame with a matching
tag, that frame is ``returned from,'' and that function is resumed.
If it finds a frame with the Catch-All object as its tag, that frame
is ``returned from,'' and in addition, %SP-Internal-Throw-Tag is set
to the tag being searched for. So that interrupted cleanup forms
behave correctly, %SP-Internal-Throw-Tag should be bound to the
Catch-All object before the Catch-All frame is built. The protected
forms are then executed, and if %SP-Internal-Throw-Tag is not the
Catch-All object, its value is thrown to. Exactly what we do is
this:
@enumerate
Put the contents of the Active-Catch register into a register, A.
Put NIL into another register, B.

If A is NIL, the tag we seek isn't on the stack. Signal an
Unseen-Throw-Tag error.

Look at the tag for the catch frame in register A. If it's the tag
we're looking for, go to step 4. If it's the Catch-All object and B
is NIL, copy A to B. Set A to the previous catch frame and go back
to step 2.

If B is non-NIL, we need to execute some cleanup forms. Return into
B's frame and bind %SP-Internal-Throw-Tag to the tag we're searching
for. When the cleanup forms are finished executing, they'll throw to
this tag again.

If B is NIL, return into this frame, pushing the return value (or
BLTing the multiple values if this frame accepts multiple values and
there are multiple values).
@end enumerate

If no form inside of a Catch results in a Throw, the catch frame
needs to be removed from the stack before execution of the function
containing the throw is resumed. For now, the value produced by the
forms inside the Catch form are thrown to the tag. Some sort of
specialized miscop could be used for this, but right now we'll
just go with the throw. The branch PC specified by a Catch
miscop is part of the constants area of the function object,
much like the function's entry points.

@node Escape
@section Escaping to Lisp code
@cindex Escape to Lisp code convention

Escaping to Lisp code is fairly straight forward. If a miscop discovers that
it needs to call a Lisp function, it creates a call frame on the control
stack and sets it up so that the called function returns to the function that
called the miscop. This means it is impossible to return control to a miscop
from a Lisp function.

@node Errors
@section Errors
@cindex Errors

When an error occurs during the execution of a miscop, a call
to %SP-Internal-Error is performed. This call is a break-type call,
so if the error is proceeded (with a Break-Return instruction), no
value will be returned.


%SP-Internal-Error is passed a fixnum error code as its first
argument. The second argument is a fixnum offset into the current
code vector that points to the location immediately following the
instruction that encountered the trouble. From this offset, the
Lisp-level error handler can reconstruct the PC of the losing
instruction, which is not readily available in the micro-machine.
Following the offset, there may be 0 - 2 additional arguments that
provide information of possible use to the error handler. For
example, an unbound-symbol error will pass the symbol in question as
the third arg.

The following error codes are currently defined. Unless otherwise
specified, only the error code and the code-vector offset are passed
as arguments.

@table @code
@item 1  Object Not List
The object is passed as the third argument.

@item 2  Object Not Symbol
The object is passed as the third argument.

@item 3  Object Not Number
The object is passed as the third argument.

@item 4  Object Not Integer
The object is passed as the third argument.

@item 5  Object Not Ratio
The object is passed as the third argument.

@item 6  Object Not Complex
The object is passed as the third argument.

@item 7  Object Not Vector
The object is passed as the third argument.

@item 8  Object Not Simple Vector
The object is passed as the third argument.

@item 9  Illegal Function Object
The object is passed as the third argument.

@item 10  Object Not Header
The object (which is not an array or function header)
is passed as the third argument.

@item 11  Object Not I-Vector
The object is passed as the third argument.

@item 12  Object Not Simple Bit Vector
The object is passed as the third argument.

@item 13  Object Not Simple String
The object is passed as the third argument.

@item 14  Object Not Character
The object is passed as the third argument.

@item 15  Object Not Control Stack Pointer
The object is passed as the third
argument.

@item 16  Object Not Binding Stack Pointer
The object is passed as the third
argument.

@item 17  Object Not Array
The object is passed as the third argument.

@item 18  Object Not Non-negative Fixnum
The object is passed as the third
argument.

@item 19  Object Not System Area Pointer
The object is passed as the third
argument.

@item 20  Object Not System Pointer
The object is passed as the third argument.

@item 21  Object Not Float
The object is passed as the third argument.

@item 22  Object Not Rational
The object is passed as the third argument.

@item 23  Object Not Non-Complex Number
A complex number has been passed to
the comparison routine for < or >. The complex number is passed as the
third argument.

@item 25  Unbound Symbol
Attempted access to the special value of an unbound
symbol. Passes the symbol as the third argument to %Sp-Internal-Error.

@item 26  Undefined Symbol
Attempted access to the definition cell of an undefined
symbol. Passes the symbol as the third argument to %Sp-Internal-Error.

@item 27 Altering NIL
Attempt to bind or setq the special value of NIL.

@item 28 Altering T
Attempt to bind or setq the special value of T.

@item 30 Illegal Vector Access Type
The specified access type is returned as the
third argument.

@item 31 Illegal Vector Size
Attempt to allocate a vector with negative size or
size too large for vectors of this type. Passes the requested size as the
third argument.

@item 32 Vector Index Out of Range
The specified index is out of bounds for
this vector. The bad index is passed as the third argument.

@item 33 Illegal Vector Index
The specified index is not a positive fixnum. The
bad index is passed as the third argument.

@item 34 Illegal Shrink Vector Value
The specified value to shrink a vector to is
not a positive fixnum. The bad value is passed as the third argument.

@item 35 Not A Shrink
The specified value is greater than the current size of the
vector being shrunk. The bad value is passed as the third argument.

@item 36  Illegal Data Vector
The data vector of an array is illegal. The bad
vector is passed as the third value.

@item 37  Array has Too Few Indices
An attempt has been made to access
an array as a two or three dimensional array when it has fewer than two
or three dimensions, respectively.

@item 38  Array has Too Many Indices
An attempt has been made to access an array
as a two or three dimensional array when it has more than two or three
dimensions, respectively.

@item 40  Illegal Byte Specifier
A bad byte specifier has been passed to one
of the byte manipulation miscops. The offending byte specifier is passed
as the third argument.

@item 41  Illegal Position in Byte Specifier
A bad position has been given in a
byte specifier that has been passed to one of the byte manipulation
miscops. The offending byte specifier is passed as the third
argument.

@item 42  Illegal Size in Byte Specifier
A bad size has been given in a
byte specifier that has been passed to one of the byte manipulation
miscops. The offending byte specifier is passed as the third
argument.

@item 43  Illegal Shift Count
A shift miscop has encountered non fixnum shift
count. The offending shift count is passed as the third argument.

@item 44  Illegal Boole Operation
The operation code passed to the boole miscop
is either not a fixnum or is out of range. The operation code is passed as
the third argument.

@item 50  Too Few Arguments
Too few arguments have been passed to a function. The
number of arguments actually passed is passed as the third argument, and the
function is passed as the fourth.

@item 51  Too Many Arguments
Too many arguments have been passed to a function.
The number of arguments actually passed is passed as the third argument, and
the function is passed as the fourth.

@item 52  Last Apply Arg Not a List
The last argument to a function being
invoked by apply is not a list. The last argument is passed as the third
argument.

@item 53  Deleted Link Table Entry
An attempt has been made to call a function
through a link table entry which no longer exists. This is a serious
internal error and should never happen.

@item 55  Error Not <=
The check-<= miscop will invoke this error if the condition
is false. The two arguments are passed as the third and fourth arguments
to %SP-internal-error.

@item 60  Divide by 0
An division operation has done a division by zero. The
two operands are passed as the third and fourth arguments.

@item 61  Unseen Throw Tag
An attempt has been made to throw to a tag that is
not in the current catch hierarchy. The offending tag is passed as the
third argument.

@item 62  Short Float Underflow
A short float operation has resulted in
underflow. The two arguments to the operation are passed as the third
and fourth arguments.

@item 63  Short Float Overflow
A short float operation has resulted in
overflow. The two arguments to the operation are passed as the third
and fourth arguments.

@item 64  Single Float Underflow
A single float operation has resulted in
underflow. The two arguments to the operation are passed as the third
and fourth arguments.

@item 65  Single Float Overflow
A single float operation has resulted in
overflow. The two arguments to the operation are passed as the third
and fourth arguments.

@item 66  Long Float Underflow
A long float operation has resulted in
underflow. The two arguments to the operation are passed as the third
and fourth arguments.

@item 67  Long Float Overflow
A long float operation has resulted in
overflow. The two arguments to the operation are passed as the third
and fourth arguments.

@item 68  Monadic Short Float Underflow
A short float operation has resulted in
underflow. The argument to the operation is passed as the third argument.

@item 69  Monadic Short Float Overflow
A short float operation has resulted in
overflow. The argument to the operation is passed as the third argument.

@item 70  Monadic Long Float Underflow
A long float operation has resulted in
underflow. The argument to the operation is passed as the third argument.

@item 71  Monadic Long Float Overflow
A long float operation has resulted in
overflow. The argument to the operation is passed as the third argument.
@end table

@node Trap
@section Trapping to the Mach Kernel
@cindex Trapping to the kernel
@cindex Kernel traps

Trapping to the Mach kernel is done through one of the syscall0, syscall1,
syscall2, syscall3, syscall4, or syscall miscops. The first argument to
these miscops is the number of the Unix syscall that is to be invoked. Any
other arguments the syscall requires are passed in order after the first
one. Syscall0 accepts only the syscall number and no other arguments;
syscall1 accepts the syscall number and a single argument to the syscall;
etc. Syscall accepts the syscall number and five or more arguments to the
Unix syscall. These syscalls generally return two values: the result twice
if the syscall succeeded and a -1 and the Unix error code if the syscall
failed.

@node Interrupts
@section Interrupts
@cindex Interrupts

An interface has been built to the general signal mechanism defined by the
Unix operating system. As mentioned in the section on function call and
return miscops, several miscops are defined that support the lowest level
interface to the Unix signal mechanism. The manual @var{CMU Common Lisp
User's Manual, Mach/IBM RT PC Edition} contains descriptions of functions
that allow a user to set up interrupt handlers for any of the Unix signals
from within Lisp.

@appendix Fasload File Format
@section General

The purpose of Fasload files is to allow concise storage and rapid
loading of Lisp data, particularly function definitions. The intent
is that loading a Fasload file has the same effect as loading the
ASCII file from which the Fasload file was compiled, but accomplishes
the tasks more efficiently. One noticeable difference, of course, is
that function definitions may be in compiled form rather than
S-expression form. Another is that Fasload files may specify in what
parts of memory the Lisp data should be allocated. For example,
constant lists used by compiled code may be regarded as read-only.

In some Lisp implementations, Fasload file formats are designed to
allow sharing of code parts of the file, possibly by direct mapping
of pages of the file into the address space of a process. This
technique produces great performance improvements in a paged
time-sharing system. Since the Mach project is to produce a
distributed personal-computer network system rather than a
time-sharing system, efficiencies of this type are explicitly @var{not}
a goal for the CMU Common Lisp Fasload file format.

On the other hand, CMU Common Lisp is intended to be portable, as it will
eventually run on a variety of machines. Therefore an explicit goal
is that Fasload files shall be transportable among various
implementations, to permit efficient distribution of programs in
compiled form. The representations of data objects in Fasload files
shall be relatively independent of such considerations as word
length, number of type bits, and so on. If two implementations
interpret the same macrocode (compiled code format), then Fasload
files should be completely compatible. If they do not, then files
not containing compiled code (so-called "Fasdump" data files) should
still be compatible. While this may lead to a format which is not
maximally efficient for a particular implementation, the sacrifice of
a small amount of performance is deemed a worthwhile price to pay to
achieve portability.

The primary assumption about data format compatibility is that all
implementations can support I/O on finite streams of eight-bit bytes.
By "finite" we mean that a definite end-of-file point can be detected
irrespective of the content of the data stream. A Fasload file will
be regarded as such a byte stream.

@section [Strategy]

A Fasload file may be regarded as a human-readable prefix followed by
code in a funny little language. When interpreted, this code will
cause the construction of the encoded data structures. The virtual
machine which interprets this code has a @var{stack} and a @var{table},
both initially empty. The table may be thought of as an expandable
register file; it is used to remember quantities which are needed
more than once. The elements of both the stack and the table are
Lisp data objects. Operators of the funny language may take as
operands following bytes of the data stream, or items popped from the
stack. Results may be pushed back onto the stack or pushed onto the
table. The table is an indexable stack that is never popped; it is
indexed relative to the base, not the top, so that an item once
pushed always has the same index.

More precisely, a Fasload file has the following macroscopic
organization. It is a sequence of zero or more groups concatenated
together. End-of-file must occur at the end of the last group. Each
group begins with a series of seven-bit ASCII characters terminated
by one or more bytes of all ones (FF@-(16)); this is called the
@var{header}. Following the bytes which terminate the header is the
@var{body}, a stream of bytes in the funny binary language. The body
of necessity begins with a byte other than FF@-(16). The body is
terminated by the operation @file{[FOP-END-GROUP]}.

The first nine characters of the header must be "@file{FASL FILE}" in
upper-case letters. The rest may be any ASCII text, but by
convention it is formatted in a certain way. The header is divided
into lines, which are grouped into paragraphs. A paragraph begins
with a line which does @var{not} begin with a space or tab character,
and contains all lines up to, but not including, the next such line.
The first word of a paragraph, defined to be all characters up to but
not including the first space, tab, or end-of-line character, is the
@var{name} of the paragraph. A Fasload file header might look something like
this:

@verbatim
FASL FILE >SteelesPerq>User>Guy>IoHacks>Pretty-Print.Slisp
Package Pretty-Print
Compiled 31-Mar-1988 09:01:32 by some random luser
Compiler Version 1.6, Lisp Version 3.0.
Functions: INITIALIZE DRIVER HACK HACK1 MUNGE MUNGE1 GAZORCH
           MINGLE MUDDLE PERTURB OVERDRIVE GOBBLE-KEYBOARD
           FRY-USER DROP-DEAD HELP CLEAR-MICROCODE
            %AOS-TRIANGLE %HARASS-READTABLE-MAYBE
Macros:    PUSH POP FROB TWIDDLE
@r[<one or more bytes of FF@-(16)>]

@end verbatim

The particular paragraph names and contents shown here are only intended as
suggestions.

@section [Fasload Language]

Each operation in the binary Fasload language is an eight-bit
(one-byte) opcode. Each has a name beginning with "@code{FOP-}". In
the following descriptions, the name is followed by operand
descriptors. Each descriptor denotes operands that follow the opcode
in the input stream. A quantity in parentheses indicates the number
of bytes of data from the stream making up the operand. Operands
which implicitly come from the stack are noted in the text. The
notation "@arrow{} stack" means that the result is pushed onto the
stack; "@arrow{} table" similarly means that the result is added to the
table. A construction like "@var{n}(1) @var{value}(@var{n})" means that
first a single byte @var{n} is read from the input stream, and this
byte specifies how many bytes to read as the operand named @var{value}.
All numeric values are unsigned binary integers unless otherwise
specified. Values described as "signed" are in two's-complement form
unless otherwise specified. When an integer read from the stream
occupies more than one byte, the first byte read is the least
significant byte, and the last byte read is the most significant (and
contains the sign bit as its high-order bit if the entire integer is
signed).

Some of the operations are not necessary, but are rather special
cases of or combinations of others. These are included to reduce the
size of the file or to speed up important cases. As an example,
nearly all strings are less than 256 bytes long, and so a special
form of string operation might take a one-byte length rather than a
four-byte length. As another example, some implementations may
choose to store bits in an array in a left-to-right format within
each word, rather than right-to-left. The Fasload file format may
support both formats, with one being significantly more efficient
than the other for a given implementation. The compiler for any
implementation may generate the more efficient form for that
implementation, and yet compatibility can be maintained by requiring
all implementations to support both formats in Fasload files.

Measurements are to be made to determine which operation codes are
worthwhile; little-used operations may be discarded and new ones
added. After a point the definition will be "frozen", meaning that
existing operations may not be deleted (though new ones may be added;
some operations codes will be reserved for that purpose).

@table @code

@item 0  @var{FOP-NOP}
No operation. (This is included because it is recognized
that some implementations may benefit from alignment of operands to some
operations, for example to 32-bit boundaries. This operation can be used
to pad the instruction stream to a desired boundary.)

@item 1  @var{FOP-POP}  @arrow{}  table

One item is popped from the stack and added to the table.

@item 2  @var{FOP-PUSH}  @var{index}(4)  @arrow{}  stack

Item number @var{index} of the table is pushed onto the stack.
The first element of the table is item number zero.

@item 3  @var{FOP-BYTE-PUSH}  @var{index}(1)  @arrow{}  stack

Item number @var{index} of the table is pushed onto the stack.
The first element of the table is item number zero.

@item 4  @var{FOP-EMPTY-LIST}  @arrow{}  stack

The empty list (@var{()}) is pushed onto the stack.

@item 5  @var{FOP-TRUTH}  @arrow{}  stack

The standard truth value (@var{T}) is pushed onto the stack.

@item 6  @var{FOP-SYMBOL-SAVE}  @var{n}(4)  @var{name}(@var{n}) @arrow{}  stack & table

The four-byte operand @var{n} specifies the length of the print name
of a symbol. The name follows, one character per byte,
with the first byte of the print name being the first read.
The name is interned in the default package,
and the resulting symbol is both pushed onto the stack and added to the table.

@item 7  @var{FOP-SMALL-SYMBOL-SAVE}  @var{n}(1)  @var{name}(@var{n})  @arrow{}  stack & table

The one-byte operand @var{n} specifies the length of the print name
of a symbol. The name follows, one character per byte,
with the first byte of the print name being the first read.
The name is interned in the default package,
and the resulting symbol is both pushed onto the stack and added to the table.

@item 8  @var{FOP-SYMBOL-IN-PACKAGE-SAVE}  @var{index}(4)
       @var{n}(4)  @var{name}(@var{n}) @arrow{}  stack & table

The four-byte @var{index} specifies a package stored in the table.
The four-byte operand @var{n} specifies the length of the print name
of a symbol. The name follows, one character per byte,
with the first byte of the print name being the first read.
The name is interned in the specified package,
and the resulting symbol is both pushed onto the stack and added to the table.

@item 9  @var{FOP-SMALL-SYMBOL-IN-PACKAGE-SAVE} @var{index}(4)
         @var{n}(1)  @var{name}(@var{n}) 
         @item @arrow{}  stack & table

The four-byte @var{index} specifies a package stored in the table.
The one-byte operand @var{n} specifies the length of the print name
of a symbol. The name follows, one character per byte,
with the first byte of the print name being the first read.
The name is interned in the specified package,
and the resulting symbol is both pushed onto the stack and added to the table.

@item 10  @var{FOP-SYMBOL-IN-BYTE-PACKAGE-SAVE}  @var{index}(1)
 @var{n}(4)  @var{name}(@var{n})
@arrow{}  stack & table

The one-byte @var{index} specifies a package stored in the table.
The four-byte operand @var{n} specifies the length of the print name
of a symbol. The name follows, one character per byte,
with the first byte of the print name being the first read.
The name is interned in the specified package,
and the resulting symbol is both pushed onto the stack and added to the table.

@item 11 @var{FOP-SMALL-SYMBOL-IN-BYTE-PACKAGE-SAVE}  @var{index}(1)
 @var{n}(1)  @var{name}(@var{n}) 
@arrow{}  stack & table

The one-byte @var{index} specifies a package stored in the table.
The one-byte operand @var{n} specifies the length of the print name
of a symbol. The name follows, one character per byte,
with the first byte of the print name being the first read.
The name is interned in the specified package,
and the resulting symbol is both pushed onto the stack and added to the table.

@item 12 Unused.

@item 13  @var{FOP-DEFAULT-PACKAGE}  @var{index}(4)

A package stored in the table entry specified by @var{index} is made
the default package for future @var{FOP-SYMBOL} and @var{FOP-SMALL-SYMBOL}
interning operations. (These package FOPs may change or disappear
as the package system is determined.)

@item 14  @var{FOP-PACKAGE}  @arrow{}  table

An item is popped from the stack; it must be a symbol.  The package of
that name is located and pushed onto the table.

@item 15  @var{FOP-LIST}  @var{length}(1)  @arrow{}  stack

The unsigned operand @var{length} specifies a number of
operands to be popped from the stack. These are made into a list
of that length, and the list is pushed onto the stack.
The first item popped from the stack becomes the last element of
the list, and so on. Hence an iterative loop can start with
the empty list and perform "pop an item and cons it onto the list"
@var{length} times.
(Lists of length greater than 255 can be made by using @var{FOP-LIST*}
repeatedly.)

@item 16  @var{FOP-LIST*}  @var{length}(1)  @arrow{}  stack

This is like @var{FOP-LIST} except that the constructed list is terminated
not by @var{()} (the empty list), but by an item popped from the stack
before any others are.  Therefore @var{length}+1 items are popped in all.
Hence an iterative loop can start with
a popped item and perform "pop an item and cons it onto the list"
@var{length}+1 times.

@item 17-24  @var{FOP-LIST-1}, @var{FOP-LIST-2}, ..., @var{FOP-LIST-8}

@var{FOP-LIST-@i{k}} is like @var{FOP-LIST} with a byte containing @var{k}
following it. These exist purely to reduce the size of Fasload files.
Measurements need to be made to determine the useful values of @var{k}.

@item 25-32  @var{FOP-LIST*-1}, @var{FOP-LIST*-2}, ..., @var{FOP-LIST*-8}

@var{FOP-LIST*-@i{k}} is like @var{FOP-LIST*} with a byte containing @var{k}
following it. These exist purely to reduce the size of Fasload files.
Measurements need to be made to determine the useful values of @var{k}.

@item 33  @var{FOP-INTEGER}  @var{n}(4)  @var{value}(@var{n}) 
 @arrow{}  stack

A four-byte unsigned operand specifies the number of following
bytes.  These bytes define the value of a signed integer in two's-complement
form. The first byte of the value is the least significant byte.

@item 34  @var{FOP-SMALL-INTEGER}  @var{n}(1)  @var{value}(@var{n})
  @arrow{}  stack

A one-byte unsigned operand specifies the number of following
bytes.  These bytes define the value of a signed integer in two's-complement
form. The first byte of the value is the least significant byte.

@item 35  @var{FOP-WORD-INTEGER}  @var{value}(4)  @arrow{}  stack

A four-byte signed integer (in the range -2@+[31] to 2@+[31]-1) follows the
operation code. A LISP integer (fixnum or bignum) with that value
is constructed and pushed onto the stack.

@item 36  @var{FOP-BYTE-INTEGER}  @var{value}(1)  @arrow{}  stack

A one-byte signed integer (in the range -128 to 127) follows the
operation code. A LISP integer (fixnum or bignum) with that value
is constructed and pushed onto the stack.

@item 37  @var{FOP-STRING}  @var{n}(4)  @var{name}(@var{n})
 @arrow{}  stack

The four-byte operand @var{n} specifies the length of a string to
construct. The characters of the string follow, one per byte.
The constructed string is pushed onto the stack.

@item 38  @var{FOP-SMALL-STRING}  @var{n}(1)  @var{name}(@var{n})  @arrow{}  stack

The one-byte operand @var{n} specifies the length of a string to
construct. The characters of the string follow, one per byte.
The constructed string is pushed onto the stack.

@item 39  @var{FOP-VECTOR}  @var{n}(4)  @arrow{}  stack

The four-byte operand @var{n} specifies the length of a vector of LISP objects
to construct. The elements of the vector are popped off the stack;
the first one popped becomes the last element of the vector.
The constructed vector is pushed onto the stack.

@item 40  @var{FOP-SMALL-VECTOR}  @var{n}(1)  @arrow{}  stack

The one-byte operand @var{n} specifies the length of a vector of LISP objects
to construct. The elements of the vector are popped off the stack;
the first one popped becomes the last element of the vector.
The constructed vector is pushed onto the stack.

@item 41  @var{FOP-UNIFORM-VECTOR}  @var{n}(4)  @arrow{}  stack

The four-byte operand @var{n} specifies the length of a vector of LISP objects
to construct. A single item is popped from the stack and used to initialize
all elements of the vector. The constructed vector is pushed onto the stack.

@item 42  @var{FOP-SMALL-UNIFORM-VECTOR}  @var{n}(1)  @arrow{}  stack

The one-byte operand @var{n} specifies the length of a vector of LISP objects
to construct. A single item is popped from the stack and used to initialize
all elements of the vector. The constructed vector is pushed onto the stack.

@item 43  @var{FOP-INT-VECTOR}  @var{n}(4)  @var{size}(1)  @var{count}(1) 

@var{data}(@var{ceiling}<@var{n}/@var{count}>@var{ceiling}<@var{size}*@var{count}/8>) 
 @arrow{}  stack

The four-byte operand @var{n} specifies the length of a vector of
unsigned integers to be constructed.  Each integer is @var{size}
bits big, and are packed in the data stream in sections of
@var{count} apiece. Each section occupies an integral number of bytes.
If the bytes of a section are lined up in a row, with the first
byte read at the right, and successive bytes placed to the left,
with the bits within a byte being arranged so that the low-order bit
is to the right, then the integers of the section are successive
groups of @var{size} bits, starting from the right and running across
byte boundaries. (In other words, this is a consistent
right-to-left convention.)  Any bits wasted at the left end of
a section are ignored, and any wasted groups in the last section
are ignored.
It is permitted for the loading implementation to use a vector
format providing more precision than is required by @var{size}.
For example, if @var{size} were 3, it would be permitted to use a vector
of 4-bit integers, or even vector of general LISP objects filled
with integer LISP objects. However, an implementation is expected
to use the most restrictive format that will suffice, and is expected
to reconstruct objects identical to those output if the Fasload file
was produced by the same implementation.
(For the PERQ U-vector formats, one would have
@var{size} an element of {1, 2, 4, 8, 16}, and @var{count}=32/@var{size};
words could be read directly into the U-vector.
This operation provides a very general format whereby almost
any conceivable implementation can output in its preferred packed format,
and another can read it meaningfully; by checking at the beginning
for good cases, loading can still proceed quickly.)
The constructed vector is pushed onto the stack.

@item 44  @var{FOP-UNIFORM-INT-VECTOR}  @var{n}(4)  @var{size}(1) 
 @var{value}(@var{ceiling}<@var{size}/8>)  @arrow{}  stack

The four-byte operand @var{n} specifies the length of a vector of unsigned
integers to construct.
Each integer is @var{size} bits big, and is initialized to the value
of the operand @var{value}.
The constructed vector is pushed onto the stack.

@item 45  @var{FOP-FLOAT}  @var{n}(1)  @var{exponent}(@var{ceiling}<@var{n}/8>) 
@var{m}(1)  @var{mantissa}(@var{ceiling}<@var{m}/8>)  @arrow{}  stack

The first operand @var{n} is one unsigned byte, and describes the number of
@var{bits} in the second operand @var{exponent}, which is a signed
integer in two's-complement format. The high-order bits of
the last (most significant) byte of @var{exponent} shall equal the sign bit.
Similar remarks apply to @var{m} and @var{mantissa}. The value denoted by these
four operands is @var{mantissa}@var{x}2@+{@var{exponent}-length(@var{mantissa})}.
A floating-point number shall be constructed which has this value,
and then pushed onto the stack. That floating-point format should be used
which is the smallest (most compact) provided by the implementation which
nevertheless provides enough accuracy to represent both the exponent
and the mantissa correctly.

@item 46-51 Unused

@item 52  @var{FOP-ALTER}  @var{index}(1)

Two items are popped from the stack; call the first @var{newval} and
the second @var{object}.        The component of @var{object} specified by
@var{index} is altered to contain @var{newval}. The precise operation
depends on the type of @var{object}:

@table @code
@item List
 A zero @var{index} means alter the car (perform @var{RPLACA}),
and @var{index}=1 means alter the cdr (@var{RPLACD}).

@item Symbol
 By definition these indices have the following meaning,
and have nothing to do with the actual representation of symbols
in a given implementation:

@table @code
@item 0
 Alter value cell.

@item 1
 Alter function cell.

@item 2
 Alter property list (!).
@end table

@item Vector (of any kind)
 Alter component number @var{index} of the vector.

@item String
 Alter character number @var{index} of the string.
@end table

@item 53  @var{FOP-EVAL}  @arrow{}  stack

Pop an item from the stack and evaluate it (give it to @var{EVAL}).
Push the result back onto the stack.

@item 54  @var{FOP-EVAL-FOR-EFFECT}

Pop an item from the stack and evaluate it (give it to @var{EVAL}).
The result is ignored.

@item 55  @var{FOP-FUNCALL}  @var{nargs}(1)  @arrow{}  stack

Pop @var{nargs}+1 items from the stack and apply the last one popped
as a function to
all the rest as arguments (the first one popped being the last argument).
Push the result back onto the stack.

@item 56  @var{FOP-FUNCALL-FOR-EFFECT}  @var{nargs}(1)

Pop @var{nargs}+1 items from the stack and apply the last one popped
as a function to
all the rest as arguments (the first one popped being the last argument).
The result is ignored.

@item 57  @var{FOP-CODE-FORMAT}  @var{id}(1)

The operand @var{id} is a unique identifier specifying the format
for following code objects. The operations @var{FOP-CODE}
and its relatives may not
occur in a group until after @var{FOP-CODE-FORMAT} has appeared;
there is no default format. This is provided so that several
compiled code formats may co-exist in a file, and so that a loader
can determine whether or not code was compiled by the correct
compiler for the implementation being loaded into.
So far the following code format identifiers are defined:

@multitable @columnfractions .1 .9 
@item 0 @tab PERQ

@item 1 @tab VAX

@item3 @tab DinkyMachine
@end multitable

@item 58  @var{FOP-CODE}  @var{nitems}(4)  @var{size}(4) 
@var{code}(@var{size})  @arrow{}  stack

A compiled function is constructed and pushed onto the stack.
This object is in the format specified by the most recent
occurrence of @var{FOP-CODE-FORMAT}.
The operand @var{nitems} specifies a number of items to pop off
the stack to use in the "boxed storage" section. The operand @var{code}
is a string of bytes constituting the compiled executable code.

@item 59  @var{FOP-SMALL-CODE}  @var{nitems}(1)  @var{size}(2) 
@var{code}(@var{size})  @arrow{}  stack

A compiled function is constructed and pushed onto the stack.
This object is in the format specified by the most recent
occurrence of @var{FOP-CODE-FORMAT}.
The operand @var{nitems} specifies a number of items to pop off
the stack to use in the "boxed storage" section. The operand @var{code}
is a string of bytes constituting the compiled executable code.

@item 60  @var{FOP-STATIC-HEAP}

Until further notice operations which allocate data structures
may allocate them in the static area rather than the dynamic area.
(The default area for allocation is the dynamic area; this
default is reset whenever a new group is begun.
This command is of an advisory nature; implementations with no
static heap can ignore it.)

@item 61  @var{FOP-DYNAMIC-HEAP}

Following storage allocation should be in the dynamic area.

@item 62  @var{FOP-VERIFY-TABLE-SIZE}  @var{size}(4)

If the current size of the table is not equal to @var{size},
then an inconsistency has been detected. This operation
is inserted into a Fasload file purely for error-checking purposes.
It is good practice for a compiler to output this at least at the
end of every group, if not more often.

@item 63  @var{FOP-VERIFY-EMPTY-STACK}

If the stack is not currently empty,
then an inconsistency has been detected. This operation
is inserted into a Fasload file purely for error-checking purposes.
It is good practice for a compiler to output this at least at the
end of every group, if not more often.

@item 64  @var{FOP-END-GROUP}

This is the last operation of a group.  If this is not the
last byte of the file, then a new group follows; the next
nine bytes must be "@var{FASL FILE}".

@item 65  @var{FOP-POP-FOR-EFFECT}  stack  @arrow{} 

One item is popped from the stack.

@item 66  @var{FOP-MISC-TRAP}  @arrow{}  stack

A trap object is pushed onto the stack.

@item 67  @var{FOP-READ-ONLY-HEAP}

Following storage allocation may be in a read-only heap.
(For symbols, the symbol itself may not be in a read-only area,
but its print name (a string) may be.
This command is of an advisory nature; implementations with no
read-only heap can ignore it, or use a static heap.)

@item 68  @var{FOP-CHARACTER}  @var{character}(3)  @arrow{}  stack

The three bytes specify the 24 bits of a CMU Common Lisp character object.
The bytes, lowest first, represent the code, control, and font bits.
A character is constructed and pushed onto the stack.

@item 69  @var{FOP-SHORT-CHARACTER}  @var{character}(1) 
@arrow{}  stack

The one byte specifies the lower eight bits of a CMU Common Lisp character
object (the code). A character is constructed with zero control
and zero font attributes and pushed onto the stack.

@item 70  @var{FOP-RATIO}  @arrow{}  stack

Creates a ratio from two integers popped from the stack.
The denominator is popped first, the numerator second.

@item 71  @var{FOP-COMPLEX}  @arrow{}  stack

Creates a complex number from two numbers popped from the stack.
The imaginary part is popped first, the real part second.

@item 72  @var{FOP-LINK-ADDRESS-FIXUP}  @var{nargs}(1)  @var{restp}(1)
  @var{offset}(4)  @arrow{}  stack

Valid only for when FOP-CODE-FORMAT corresponds to the Vax or the
DinkyMachine.
This operation pops a symbol and a code object from the stack and pushes
a modified code object back onto the stack according to the needs of the
runtime code linker on the Vax or DinkyMachine.

@item 73  @var{FOP-LINK-FUNCTION-FIXUP}  @var{offset}(4) 
@arrow{}  stack

Valid only for when FOP-CODE-FORMAT corresponds to the Vax or the
DinkyMachine.
This operation pops a symbol and a code object from the stack and pushes
a modified code object back onto the stack according to the needs of the
runtime code linker on the Vax or the DinkyMachine.

@item 74  @var{FOP-FSET} 

Pops the top two things off of the stack and uses them as arguments to FSET
(i.e. SETF of SYMBOL-FUNCTION).

@item 128  @var{FOP-LINK-ADDRESS-FIXUP}  @var{nargs}  @var{flag} 
@var{offset} 
Valid only when FOP-CODE-FORMAT corresponds to the
DinkyMachine. This operation pops a symbol and a function object
off the stack. The code vector in the function object is modified
according to the needs of the runtime code linker of the DinkyMachine
and pushed back on the stack. This FOP links in calls to other functions.

@item 129  @var{FOP-MISCOP-FIXUP}  @var{index}(2)  @var{offset}(4) 

Valid only when FOP-CODE-FORMAT corresponds to the DinkyMachine.
This operation pops a code object from the stack and pushes a
modified code object back onto the stack according to the needs of
the runtime code linker on the DinkyMachine. This FOP links in
calls to the assembler language support routines.

@item 130  @var{FOP-ASSEMBLER-ROUTINE}  @var{code-length} 

Valid only when FOP-CODE-FORMAT corresponds to the DinkyMachine.
This operation loads assembler code into the assembler code space of the
currently running Lisp.

@item 131  @var{FOP-FIXUP-MISCOP-ROUTINE} 
Valid only when FOP-CODE-FORMAT
corresponds to the DinkyMachine. This operation pops a list of
external references, a list of external labels defined, the name, and the
code address off the stack. This information is saved, so that after
everything is loaded, all the external references can be resolved.

@item 132  @var{FOP-FIXUP-ASSEMBLER-ROUTINE} 
is similar to
FOP-FIXUP-MISCOP-ROUTINE, except it is for internal assembler routines
rather than ones visible to Lisp.

@item 133  @var{FOP-FIXUP-USER-MISCOP-ROUTINE} 
is similar to
FOP-FIXUP-MISCOP-ROUTINE, except it is for routines written by users who
have an extremely good understanding of the system internals.

@item 134  @var{FOP-USER-MISCOP-FIXUP}  @var{offset}(4) 
is similar
to FOP-MISCOP-FIXUP, but is used to link in user defined miscops.

@item 255  @var{FOP-END-HEADER}
Indicates the end of a group header, as described above.
@end table

@chapter Appendix -- Building CMU Common Lisp

@section(Introduction)
This document explains how to build a working Common Lisp from source code on
the IBM RT PC under the Mach operating system. You should already have a
working Common Lisp running on an IBM RT PC before trying to build a new Common
Lisp.

Throughout this document the following terms are used:

@table @emph
@item Core file
A core file is a file containing an image of a Lisp system. The
core file contains header information describing where the data in the rest of
the file should be placed in memory. There is a simple C program which reads a
core file into memory at the correct locations and then jumps to a location
determined by the contents of the core file. The C code includes the X
window system version 10 release 4 which may be called from Lisp.


@item Cold core file
A cold core file contains enough of the Lisp system to make it
possible to load in the rest of the code necessary to generate a full Common
Lisp. A cold core file is generated by the program Genesis.

@item Miscops
Miscops are assembler language routines that are used to support
compiled Lisp code. A Lisp macro assembler provides a
convenient mechanism for writing these assembler language routines.

@item Matchmaker
Matchmaker is a program developed to automatically generate
remote procedure call interfaces between programs. Matchmaker accepts
a description of a remote procedure call interface and generates code
that implements it.
@end table

There are many steps required to go from sources to a working Common Lisp
system. Each step will be explained in detail in the following sections.
It is possible to perform more than one step with one invocation of Lisp.
However, I recommend that each step be started with a fresh Lisp. There
is some small chance that something done in one step will adversely affect
a following step if the same Lisp is used. The scripts for each
step assume that you are in the user package which is the default when
Lisp first starts up. If you change to some other package, some of these
steps may not work correctly.

In many of the following steps, there are lines setting up search lists so that
command files know where to find the sources. What I have done is create a
init.lisp file that sets up these search lists for me. This file is
automatically loaded from the user's home directory (as determined by the
@b[HOME] environment variable) when you start up Lisp. Note that my init.lisp
file is included with the sources. You may have to modify it, if you change
where the lisp sources are.

@section(Installing Source Code)
With this document, you should also have received a tape cartridge in tar
format containing the complete Common Lisp source code. You should create
some directory where you want to put the source code. For the following
discussion, I will assume that the source code lives in the directory
/usr/lisp. To install the source code on your machine, issue the following
commands:
@example
cd /usr/lisp
tar xvf <tape device>
@end example
The first command puts you into the directory where you want the source code,
and the second extracts all the files and sub-directories from the tape into
the current directory. <Tape device> should be the name of the tape device on
your machine, usually /dev/st0.

The following sub-directories will be created by tar:

@table @code
@item bin
contains a single executable file, lisp, which is a C program
used to start up Common Lisp.

@item clc
contains the Lisp source code for the Common Lisp compiler and assembler.

@item code
contains the Lisp source code that corresponds to all the functions,
variables, macros, and special forms described in @var{Common Lisp: The Language}
by Guy L. Steele Jr., as well as some Mach specific files.

@item hemlock
contains the Lisp source code for Hemlock, an emacs-like editor
written completely in Common Lisp.

@item icode
contains Matchmaker generated code for interfaces to Inter Process
Communication (IPC) routines. This code is used to communicate with other
processes using a remote procedure call mechanism. Under Mach, all the
facilities provided by Mach beyond the normal Berkeley Unix 4.3 system
calls are accessed from Lisp using this IPC mechanism. Currently, the
code for the Mach, name server, Lisp typescript, and Lisp eval server
interfaces reside in this directory.

@item idefs
contains the Matchmaker definition files used to generate the Lisp
code in the icode directory.

@item lib
contains files needed to run Lisp. The file lisp.core is known as a
Lisp core file and is loaded into memory by the lisp program mentioned
above in the entry for the bin directory. This file has a format which
allows it to be mapped into memory at the correct locations. The files
spell-dictionary.text and spell-dictionary.bin are the text and binary
form of a dictionary, respectively, used by Hemlock's spelling checker and
corrector. The two files hemlock.cursor and hemlock.mask are used by
Hemlock when running under the X window system.

@item miscops
contains the Lisp assembler source code for all the miscops
that support low level Lisp functions, such as storage allocation,
complex operations that can not performed in-line, garbage collection, and
other operations. These routines are written in assembler, so that they
are as efficient as possible. These routines use a very short calling
sequence, so calling them is very cheap compared to a normal Lisp
function call.

@item mm
contains the Lisp source code for the Matchmaker program. This program
is used to generate the Lisp source code files in icode from the corresponding
matchmaker definitions in idefs.

@item pcl
contains the Lisp source code for a version of the Common Lisp Object
System (originally Portable Common Loops),
an object oriented programming language built on top of Common Lisp.

@item X
contains the C object files for X version 10 release 4 C library
routines. These are linked with the lisp startup code, so that X is
available from Lisp.

@item scribe
contains Scribe source and postscript output for the manuals
describing various aspects of the CMU Common Lisp implementation.

@item demos
contains the Lisp source code for various demonstration programs.
This directory contains the Gabriel benchmark set (bmarks.lisp) and
a sub-directory containing the Soar program which is also used for
benchmarking purposes. There may be other programs and/or sub-directories
here that you may look at.
@end table

These directories contain source files as well as Lisp object files.
This means it is not necessary to go through all the steps to
build a new a Common Lisp, only those steps that are affected by
a modification to the sources. For example, modifying the compiler
will require recompiling everything. Modifying a miscop file should
require only reassembling that particular file and rebuilding the
cold core file and full core file.

As well as the directories mentioned above, there are also several files
contained in the top-level directory. These are:

@table @file

@item init.lisp
is a Lisp init file I use. This sets up some standard search
lists, as well as defines a Hemlock mode for editing miscop
source files.

lisp.c
contains the C code used to start up the lisp core image under Mach.

lispstart.s
contains some assembler language code that is invoked by lisp.c
to finish the process of starting up the lisp process.

makefile
contains make definitions for compiling lisp.c and lispstart.s
into the lisp program.

rg
contains some adb commands that can be read into adb while debugging a lisp
process. It prints out all the registers, the name of the currently
executing Lisp function, and sets an adb variable to the current stack frame
which is used by the following file.

st
contains some adb commands that can be read into adb while debugging
a lisp process. It prints out a Lisp stack frame and the name of the
function associated with the stack frame. It also updates the adb variable
mentioned above to point to the next stack frame. Repeatedly reading this
file into adb will produce a backtrace of all the active call frames
on the Lisp stack.

ac
contains some adb commands that print out the current values of the
active catch pointer. This points to the head of a list of catch frames
that exist on the control stack.

cs
contains some adb commands that print out the contents of a catch
frame. Reading cs into adb several times in a row (after reading ac once)
will print out the catch frames in order.
@end table

@section(Compiling the Lisp Startup Program)
To compile the lisp start up program, you should be in the top level directory
of the sources (/usr/lisp) and type:
@example
make lisp
@end example
This will compile the file lisp.c, assemble the file lispstart.s and produce
an executable file lisp. Currently the default location for the lisp core
file is /usr/misc/.lisp/lib/lisp.core. If you want to change this default
location, edit the file lisp.c and change the line
@example
#define COREFILE "/usr/misc/.lisp/lib/lisp.core"
@end example
to refer to the file where you intend to put the core file.

This step takes a few seconds.

@section(Assembling Assembler routines)
The standard core image includes a Lisp macro assembler. To assemble all
the miscops, the following steps should be performed:
@example
(compile-file "/usr/lisp/clc/miscasm.lisp")
(load "/usr/lisp/clc/miscasm.fasl")
(setf (search-list "msc:") '("/usr/lisp/miscops/"))
(clc::asm-files)
@end example
The first line compiles a file that contains a couple of functions used to
assemble miscop source files. The second line loads the resulting compiled
file into the currently executing core image. The third line defines the
msc search list which is used by the function clc::asm-files to locate
the miscop sources. The terminal will display information as each file
is assembled. For each file a .fasl, a .list, and an .err file will be
generated in /usr/lisp/miscops.

This step takes about half an hour.

@section(Compiling the Compiler)

To compile the compiler is simple:
@example
(setf (search-list "clc:") '("/usr/lisp/clc/"))
(load "clc:compclc.lisp")
@end example
The first line just sets up a search list variable clc, so that the file
compclc.lisp can find the compiler sources. The terminal will display
information as each file is assembled. For each file a .fasl and an .err file
will be generated. A log of the compiler output is also displayed on the
terminal.

This step takes about forty-five minutes.

@section(Compiling the Lisp Sources)

Compiling the Lisp source code is also easy:
@example
(setf (search-list "code:") '("/usr/lisp/code/"))
(load "code:worldcom.lisp")
@end example
Again, the first line defines a search list variable, so that the file
worldcom.lisp can find the Lisp sources. As each file is compiled, the
name of the file is printed on the terminal. For each file a .fasl will be
generated. Also, a single error log will be generated in the file
code:compile-lisp.log.

This step takes about an hour and a half.

@section(Compiling Hemlock)

Compiling the Hemlock source code is done as follows:
@example
(setf (search-list "hem:") '("/usr/lisp/hemlock/"))
(load "hem:ctw.lisp")
@end example
Again, the first line defines a search list variable, so that ctw.lisp can
find the Hemlock sources. As each file is compiled, the name of the file is
printed on the terminal. For each file a .fasl will be generated. Also, a
single error log will be generated in the file hem:lossage.log.

This step takes about forty-five minutes.

@section(Compiling Matchmaker)
Compiling the matchmaker sources is done as follows:
@example
(setf (search-list "mm:") '("/usr/lisp/mm"))
(compile-file "mm:mm.lisp")
(load "mm:mm.fasl")
(compile-mm)
@end example
The first line sets up a search list, so that the matchmaker sources can be
found. The second line compiles the file containing a function for compiling
the matchmaker sources. The third line loads the file just
compiled, and the final line invokes the function compile-mm which compiles the
matchmaker sources. For each file, a .fasl and .err file is generated. Also,
a log of the compiler output is printed to the terminal.

This step takes about 15 minutes

@section(Generating Lisp Source Files from Matchmaker Definition Files)
The following sequence of commands is necessary to generate the Lisp
files for the Mach interface:
@example
(setf (search-list "mm:") '("/usr/lisp/mm/"))
(setf (search-list "idefs:") '("/usr/lisp/idefs/"))
(setf (search-list "icode:") '("/usr/lisp/icode/"))
(setf (search-list "code:") '("/usr/lisp/code/"))
(setf (default-directory) "/usr/lisp/icode/")
(load "code:mm-interfaces.lisp")
@end example
The first four lines set up search lists for mm (matchmaker sources), idefs
(matchmaker interface definition files), icode (Lisp matchmaker interface
sources), and code (Lisp code sources). The fifth line changes the current
working directory to be /usr/lisp/icode. This is where the output from
matchmaker will be placed. And finally, the last line invokes matchmaker on
the matchmaker definition files for all the interfaces.

Matchmaker generates three files for each interface XXX:

@table @file

@item XXXdefs.lisp
contains constants and record definitions for the interface.

@item XXXmsgdefs.lisp
contains definitions of offsets to important fields in the
messages that are sent to and received from the interface.

@item XXXuser.lisp
contains code for each remote procedure, that sends a message
to the server and receives the reply from the server (if appropriate).
Each of these functions returns one or more values. The first value
returned is a general return which specifies whether the remote procedure
call succeeded or gives an indication of why it failed. Other values may
be returned depending on the particular remote procedure. These values are
returned using the multiple value mechanism of Common Lisp.
@end table

This step takes about five minutes.

@section(Compiling Matchmaker Generated Lisp Files)
To compile the matchmaker generated Lisp files the following steps should
be performed:
@example
(setf (search-list "code:") '("/usr/lisp/code/"))
(setf (search-list "icode:") '("/usr/lisp/icode/"))
(load "code:comutil.lisp")
@end example
The first two lines set up search lists for the code and icode directory.
The final line loads a command file that compiles the Mach interface
definition in the correct order. Note that once the files are compiled,
the XXXmsgdefs files are no longer needed. The file
/usr/lisp/icode/lossage.log contains a listing of all the error messages
generated by the compiler.

This step takes about fifteen minutes.

@section(Compiling the Common Lisp Object System)

To compile the Common Lisp Object System (CLOS) do the following:
@example
(setf (search-list "pcl:") '("/usr/lisp/pcl/"))
(rename-package (find-package "CLOS") "OLD-CLOS")
(compile-file "pcl:defsys.lisp")
(load "pcl:defsys.fasl")
(clos::compile-pcl)
@end example
The first line sets up a search list as usual. The second line renames the
CLOS package to be the OLD-CLOS package. This is so that the current version
of CLOS doesn't interfere with the compilation process. The third line
compiles a file containing some functions for building CLOS. The fourth
line loads in the result of the previous compilation. The final line
compiles all the CLOS files necessary for a working CLOS system. 

The file /usr/lisp/pcl/test.lisp is a file that contains some test functions.
To run it through CLOS build a new Lisp and start up a fresh Lisp
resulting from the build and do the following:
@example
(in-package 'clos)
(compile-file "/usr/lisp/pcl/test.lisp")
(load "/usr/lisp/pcl/test.fasl")
@end example
This sequence of function calls puts you in the CLOS package, compiles the
test file and then loads it. As the test file is loaded, it executes several
tests. It will print out a message specifying whether each test passed or
failed.

Currently, CLOS is built into the standard core.

This step takes about 30 minutes.

@section(Compiling Genesis)
To compile genesis do the following:
@example
(compile-file "/usr/lisp/clc/genesis.lisp")
@end example
Genesis is used to build a cold core file. Compiling Genesis takes about five
minutes.

@section(Building a Cold Core File)
Once all the files have been assembled or compiled as described above, it is
necessary to build a cold core file as follows:
@example
(setf (search-list "code:") '("/usr/lisp/code/"))
(setf (search-list "icode:") '("/usr/lisp/icode/"))
(setf (search-list "msc:") '("/usr/lisp/miscops/"))
(load "/usr/lisp/clc/genesis.fasl")
(load "code:worldbuild.lisp")
@end example
The first three lines set up search lists for the code, icode, and miscops
subdirectories. The fourth line loads in the program Genesis which builds
the cold core file. The last line calls Genesis on a list of the files that
are necessary to build the cold core file. As each file is being processed,
its name is printed to the terminal. Genesis generates two files:
/usr/lisp/ilisp.core and /usr/lisp/lisp.map. Ilisp.core is the cold core
file and lisp.map is a file containing the location of all the functions
and miscops in the cold core file. Lisp.map is useful for debugging the
cold core file.

This step takes from about fifteen minutes.

@section(Building a Full Common Lisp)
The cold core file built above does not contain some of the more useful
programs such as the compiler and hemlock. To build these into a core, it is
necessary to do the following:
@example
lisp -c /usr/lisp/ilisp.core
(in-package "USER")
(load (open "/usr/lisp/code/worldload.lisp"))
@end example
The first line invokes the lisp startup program specifying the cold core
file just built as the core file to load. This cold core file is set up
to do a significant amount of initialization and it is quite possible that
some bug will occur during this initialization process. After about a
minute, you should get a prompt of the form:
@example
CMU Common Lisp kernel core image 2.7(?).
[You are in the Lisp Package.]
*
@end example
The following two lines should then be entered. The first of these puts
you into the User package which is the package you should be in when the
full core is first started up. It is necessary to add this line, because
the current package is rebound while a file is loaded. The last line loads
in a file that loads in the compiler, hemlock, and some other files not yet
loaded. The open call is @b[essential] otherwise when the full core is
started up, load will try to close the file and probably invalidate memory
that is needed. When load is passed a stream, it does not automatically
close the stream. With a file name it now does after a recent bug fix.
This file prompts for the versions of the Lisp system, the compiler, and
hemlock. You should enter versions that make sense for your installation.
It then purifies the core image. Up to this point most of the Lisp system
has been loaded into dynamic space. Only a few symbols and some other data
structures are in static space. The process of purification moves Lisp
objects into static and read-only space, leaving very little in dynamic
space. Having the Lisp system in static and read-only space reduces the
amount of work the garbage collector has to do. Only those objects needed
in the final core file are retained. Finally, a new core file is generated
and is written to the file /usr/lisp/nlisp.core. Also, the currently
running Lisp should go through the default initialization process, finally
prompting for input with an asterisk. At this point you have successfully
built a new core file containing a complete Common Lisp implementation.

This step takes about thirty minutes.

@section(Debugging)
Debugging Lisp code is much easier with a fully functional Lisp. However, it
is quite possible that a change made in the system can cause a bug to happen
while running the cold core file. If this happens, it is best to use adb to
track down the problem. Unfortunately, the core file (i.e., the
remains of a process normally created by Unix when a process dies) generated by
such a bug will be of no use. To get some useful information, follow these
steps:
@enumerate
Look at the file /usr/lisp/lisp.map and find the entry points for the
miscop routines error0, error1, and error2. These entry points are
used to invoke the Lisp error system from the miscops. Write down
the numbers beside these names. They are the addresses (in hex) of where
the miscops are located when the cold core file is loaded into memory.

Run adb on the lisp file, i.e.:

@example
adb lisp
@end example

Set a breakpoint at the lispstart entry point:
@example
lispstart:b
@end example

Start the lisp program running, telling it to use ilisp.core (I'm
assuming you're in /usr/lisp):
@example
:r -c ilisp.core
@end example

After a while, you will hit the lispstart breakpoint. The core file has been
mapped into memory, but control is still in the C startup code. At this point,
you should enter breakpoints for all the error entry points described above.

Continue running the program by typing :c. Shortly after this, the C lisp
program will give up control to Lisp proper. Lisp will start doing its
initialization and will probably hit one of the error break points.
At that point you can look around at the state and try and discover
what has gone wrong. Note that the two files rg and st are useful at this
point. Also, you should look at the document @var{Internal Design of Common
Lisp on the IBM RT PC} by David B. McDonald, Scott E. Fahlman, and Skef
Wholey so that you know the internal data structures.
@end enumerate

@section(Running the Soar Benchmark)
To compile the soar benchmark, you should do the following:
@example
(compile-file "/usr/lisp/demos/soar/soar.lisp")
@end example

To run the benchmark, you should start up a fresh Lisp and do the following:
@example
(load "/usr/lisp/demos/soar/soar.fasl")
(load "/usr/lisp/demos/soar/default.soar")
(load "/usr/lisp/demos/soar/eight.soar")
(user-select 'first)
(init-soar)
(time (run))
@end example
The first two lines load in the standard Soar system. The third line loads in
information about the eight puzzle which is a standard Soar puzzle that has
been run on several different machines. The fourth line sets up the puzzle
conditions so that it will select a goal to work on automatically. The fifth
line initializes Soar's working memory, etc. The final line is the one that
actually runs the benchmark. Soar prints out a fair amount of information as
it solves the puzzle. The final state should be numbered 143 when it finishes.
The time macro prints out information about information various resources after
the eight puzzle has run.

@section(Summary)
I have tried to present sufficient information here to allow anyone to be
able to build a Common Lisp system under Mach from the sources. I am sure
there are many tricks that I have learned to use to reduce the amount of grief
necessary to build a system. My best recommendation is to go slowly. Start
by building a system from the sources provided on the tape. Make sure you
are comfortable doing that before you try modifying anything.

Some hints on building the system which you may find useful:

@itemize
@item If you change the compiler, you will have to recompile all the sources before
the change is reflected in a system. Changing the compiler is probably the
most dangerous change you can make, since an error here means that
nothing will work. In particular, this is the time you are going to need
to get familiar with adb and the internal structure of the Lisp, since a
serious error in the compiler will show up during the initialization of the
cold core file.

@item Changing the miscops should be done with care. They follow a fairly rigid
convention and you should understand all the information provided in
@var{Internal Design of Common Lisp on the IBM RT PC} before making any changes
to miscops. You will probably need to get familiar with adb to debug some of
the changes. Note that this requires building a new cold core file and a final
core file before the change is reflected in the system.

@item Changing sources in the code directory should be fairly straight forward. The
only time this will cause trouble is if you change something that a lot of 
files depend on in which case you will have to recompile everything and build
a new cold core file and a core file.

@item Changing hemlock should have no adverse effect on system integrity.

@item If you make a fairly major change, it is a good idea to go through the complete
process of building a core file at least two or three times. If things are
still working at the end of this, your change is probably correct and shouldn't
cause any serious trouble.

@item Finally, always keep at least one backup copy of a good core image around.
If you build a bad core file over an existing one and can't back up, it is
possible that you may not be able to recover from a serious error.
@end itemize


