
@node SBCL Build Process
@chapter SBCL Build Process


@deffn shell make.sh [
Move point forward @var{nchars} characters.
@end deffn


@table @code
@item -v
@itemx --verbose
Enable verbose output to track script progress in detail.

@item -o @var{file}
@itemx --output=@var{file}
Direct the output to @var{file} instead of the default standard output.

@item -r
Perform the operation recursively on directories.
@end table



Usage: $0 [OPTION]...

  Important: make.sh does not currently control the entirety of the
  build: configuration file customize-target-features.lisp and certain
  environment variables play a role as well. see file INSTALL for
  details.

Options:
  -h, --help           Display this help and exit.

  --prefix=<path>      Specify the install location.

      Script install.sh installs SBCL under the specified prefix
      path: runtime as prefix/bin/sbcl, additional files under
      prefix/lib/sbcl, and documentation under prefix/share.

      This option also affects the binaries: built-in default for
      SBCL_HOME is: prefix/lib/sbcl/

      Default prefix is: /usr/local

  --dynamic-space-size=<size> Default dynamic-space size for target.

      This specifies the default dynamic-space size for the SBCL
      being built. If you need to control the dynamic-space size
      of the host SBCL, use the --xc-host option.

      If not provided, the default is platform-specific. <size> is
      taken to be megabytes unless explicitly suffixed with Gb in
      order to specify the size in gigabytes.

  --with-<feature>     Build with specified feature.
  --without-<feature>  Build wihout the specfied feature.

  --fancy              Build with several optional features:

                           $FANCY_FEATURES

                       Plus threading on platforms which support it.

  --arch=<string>      Specify the architecture to build for.

      Mainly for doing x86 builds on x86-64.

  --xc-host=<string>   Specify the Common Lisp compilation host.

      The string provided should be a command to invoke the
      cross-compilation Lisp system in such a way, that it reads
      commands from standard input, and terminates when it reaches end
      of file on standard input.

      Examples:

       "sbcl --disable-debugger --no-sysinit --no-userinit"
                  Use an existing SBCL binary as a cross-compilation
                  host even though you have stuff in your
                  initialization files which makes it behave in such a
                  non-standard way that it keeps the build from
                  working. Also disable the debugger instead of
                  waiting endlessly for a programmer to help it out
                  with input on *DEBUG-IO*. (This is the default.)

       "sbcl"
                  Use an existing SBCL binary as a cross-compilation
                  host, including your initialization files and
                  building with the debugger enabled. Not recommended
                  for casual users.

       "lisp -noinit -batch"
                  Use an existing CMU CL binary as a cross-compilation
                  host when you have weird things in your .cmucl-init
                  file.

  --host-location=<string> Location of the source directory on compilation host

      The string is passed to the command rsync to transfer the
      necessary files between the target and host directories during
      the make-target-*.sh steps of cross-compilation (cf. make.sh)

      Examples:

       user@host-machine:/home/user/sbcl
                  Transfer the files to/from directory /home/user/sbcl
                  on host-machine.

EOF


perform_host_lisp_check=no
fancy=false
some_options=false
android=false
if [ -z "$ANDROID_API" ]; then
    ANDROID_API=21
fi
for option
do
  optarg_ok=true
  # Split --foo=bar into --foo and bar.
  case $option in
      *=*)
        # For ease of scripting skip valued options with empty
        # values.
        optarg=`expr "X$option" : '[^=]*=\(.*\)'` || optarg_ok=false
        option=`expr "X$option" : 'X\([^=]*=\).*'`
        ;;
      --with*)
        optarg=`expr "X$option" : 'X--[^-]*-\(.*\)'` \
            || bad_option "Malformed feature toggle: $option"
        option=`expr "X$option" : 'X\(--[^-]*\).*'`
        ;;
      *)
        optarg=""
        ;;
  esac

  case $option in
      --help | -help | -h)
        print_help="yes" ;;
      --prefix=)
        $optarg_ok && SBCL_PREFIX=$optarg
        ;;
      --arch=)
        $oparg_ok && SBCL_ARCH=$optarg
        ;;
      --xc-host=)
        $optarg_ok && SBCL_XC_HOST=$optarg
        ;;
      --host-location=)
        $optarg_ok && SBCL_HOST_LOCATION=$optarg
        ;;
      --target-location=)
        $optarg_ok && SBCL_TARGET_LOCATION=$optarg
        ;;
      --dynamic-space-size=)
        $optarg_ok && SBCL_DYNAMIC_SPACE_SIZE=$optarg
	;;
      --with)
        WITH_FEATURES="$WITH_FEATURES :$optarg"
        if [ "$optarg" = "android" ]
        then
            android=true
        fi
        ;;
      --without)
        WITHOUT_FEATURES="$WITHOUT_FEATURES :$optarg"
        case $CONTRIBS
        in *"$optarg"*)
               SBCL_CONTRIB_BLOCKLIST="$SBCL_CONTRIB_BLOCKLIST $optarg"
        ;; esac
	;;
      --android-api=)
        $optarg_ok && ANDROID_API=$optarg
        ;;
      --ndk=)
        $optarg_ok && NDK=$optarg
        ;;
      --fancy)
        WITH_FEATURES="$WITH_FEATURES $FANCY_FEATURES"
        # Lower down we add :sb-thread for platforms where it can be built.
        fancy=true
        ;;
      --check-host-lisp)
        perform_host_lisp_check=yes
        ;;
      -*)
        bad_option "Unknown command-line option to $0: \"$option\""
        ;;
      *)
        if $some_options
        then
            bad_option "Unknown command-line option to $0: \"$option\""
        else
            SBCL_XC_HOST=$option
        fi
        ;;
  esac
  some_options=true
done



The entry point to the bulid process is @file{make.sh} which calls the
following scripts directly and in order:

@table @file
@item make-config.sh 
@item make-host-1.sh
@item make-target-1.sh
@item make-host-2.sh
@item make-target-2.sh
@item make-target-contrib.sh
@end table

@sp
@noindent
The shell script files in turn load lisp files, sometimes with
analogous names, e.g. @file{make-host-1.sh} @arrow{}
@file{make-host-1.lisp}. The lisp files behave in a very similar way
to the conventions of shell scripts, i.e. the loading of the file
creates side effects and many functions are defined at the top of the
file and then called at the top-level futher in the file. Because the
files are only loaded once, there are no @code{eval-when}s. The
context is always assumed to be @code{:load-toplevel}. It should also
be noted that a single lisp session is not mainted throughout. In
particular each shell scripts terminates any CL sessions it it
initiated when it ends. The following is an example of the convention:

@example
echo '(load "loader.lisp") (load-sbcl-file "make-host-1.lisp")' | \
    $SBCL_XC_HOST
@end example


@node make-config.sh
@section @file {make-config.sh}
@cindex make-config.sh

texinfo@deffn Shell make-config.sh --check-host-lisp
Move point forward @var{nchars} characters.
@end deffn


@file{make-configu.sh} is called like the following:

@command{sh make-config.sh --xc-host="sbcl" --arch=riscv64 --check-host-lisp}

@sp
@noindent
This creates the @file{output/} directory that ordinarily contains the
following files (and a few additional ones for Android):

@table @file
@item build-config

This sets up shell environment variables: @env{GNUMAKE},
@env{SBCL_XC_HOST}, @env{android}, @env{SBCL_CONTRIB_BLOCKLIST}, and
@env{SBCL_HOST_LOCATION} (for rsync).

@item build-id.inc
This creates a string to designate the build, something like:
@code{my-host-userid-2026-01-01-11-00-00}. I.e. A compbination of
host, user id, date and time.

@item dynamic-space-size.txt

Used to communicate the @code{--dynamic-space-size} parameter to
lisp, i.e., in @file{src/compiler/generic/parms.lisp}

@example
(with-open-file (f "output/dynamic-space-size.txt"
                   :if-does-not-exist nil)
    @dots{})
@end example

@item prefix.def
This is contains the prefix to which SBCL will be install using the
@file{install.sh} command, e.g. @code{SBCL_PREFIX='/usr/local'}


@end table


Further in the build process additional files will also be added to
this directory. If you're performing an android cross-compile build,
additional files like, @file{output/ndk-config} will also be added
during @file{make-config.sh}.

In addition to @file{output/}, @file{make-config.sh} also create
@file{local-target-features.lisp-expr}, the basic lisp parameters for
the build. It is primarily used by @file{shared.lisp}. It looks
something like the following lambda expression:

@example
;;;; This is a machine-generated file.
;;;; Please do not edit it by hand.
;;;; See make-config.sh.
(lambda (features)
  (set-difference
   (union features
          (list :riscv
                :sb-thread
                :os-provides-clock-gettime
                :unix
                :linux
                :elf
                :64-bit
                :little-endian
                :os-provides-dlopen
                :os-provides-dladdr
                :os-provides-blksize-t
                :os-provides-suseconds-t
                :os-provides-getprotoby-r
                :os-provides-poll
                :os-provides-close-range-wrapper
                :os-provides-posix-spawn
                :gencgc
                :compare-and-swap-vops
                :memory-barrier-vops))
   (list)))
@end example
The individual keyword elements are built up using a fairly elaborate
(and perhaps not very robust), network of shell script conditionals,
e.g.

@example
case "$sbcl_os" in
    linux)
        printf ' :unix :linux :elf' >> $ltf
        case "$sbcl_arch" in
          arm64 | ppc64 | x86 | x86-64)
	        printf ' :gcc-tls' >> $ltf
        esac
        case "$sbcl_arch" in
          arm | arm64 | ppc | ppc64 | x86 | x86-64)
	        printf ' :use-sys-mmap' >> $ltf
        esac
        @dots{}
@end example
@noindent
where @code{$ltf} is the @file{local-target-features.lisp-expr} file.

@sp
@noindent
@file{make-config.sh} is also rsync aware. So, if you've specified the
@code{--host-location} flag, it will try and rsync to the specified host.


@example
if [ -n "$SBCL_HOST_LOCATION" ]; then
    echo //setting up host configuration
    rsync --delete-after -a output/ "$SBCL_HOST_LOCATION/output/"
    rsync -a local-target-features.lisp-expr version.lisp-expr \
        "$SBCL_HOST_LOCATION/"
fi
@end example



If you're cross-compiling, @file{make-config.sh} should "do the right
thing" when run on the target machine, with the minor caveat that any
@file{--xc-host} parameter should be suitable for the host machine
instead of the target.


@node make-host-1.sh
@section @file {make-host-1.sh}
@cindex make-host-1.sh

@file{make-host-1.sh} Is called by @file{make.sh} with no parameters,
getting its configuration from @file{local-target-features.lisp-expr}
read by @file{shared.lisp}. The file is a thin wrapper to
@file{make-host-1.lisp}. It compiles and loads the cross-compiler. The
cross compiler is not actually run until @file{make-host-2.sh} But
needs to be loaded because each file has potential dependancies on
previous files.


The lisp file, @file{make-host-1.lisp}, is mostly loaded for its side
effects. The following exposition outlines it's behavior.

@node Setup SB-XC:*FEATURES*
@subsection @file {Setup SB-XC:*FEATURES*}
@cindex sb-xc:*features*


Loading @file{src/cold/shared.lisp} sets @code{sb-xc:*features*} at
the top level. It's also resonsible for creating the @code{sb-cold}
package.


@node Load @code{set-up-cold-packages.lisp}
@subsection Load @file{set-up-cold-packages.lisp}
@cindex set-up-cold-packages.lisp

The file @file{src/cold/set-up-cold-packages.lisp} is responsible for
setting up the package @code{sb-cold}. Quite a bit of machinery is for
SBCL which must carefully important and expor symbols from
@code{sb-ext}

@node Load @code{defun-load-or-cload-xcompiler.lisp}
@subsection Load @file{defun-load-or-cload-xcompiler.lisp}
@cindex defun-load-or-cload-xcompiler.lisp

@file{src/cold/defun-load-or-cload-xcompiler.lisp} 

@node Load @code{ucd-filespecs.lisp-expr}
@subsection Load @file{ucd-filespecs.lisp-expr}
@cindex ucd-filespecs.lisp-expr

@file{src/cold/ucd-filespecs.lisp-expr} 

@node Load @code{ucd.lisp}
@subsection Load @file{ucd.lisp}
@cindex ucd.lisp

@file{tools-for-build/ucd.lisp} 


@node Load @code{corefile.lisp}
@subsection Load @file{corefile.lisp}
@cindex corefile.lisp

@file{tools-for-build/corefile.lisp} 

@node Load directory @code{genesis}
@subsection Load directory @file{genesis}
@cindex genesis

Apply the function @code{sb-cold:genesis} to the files in
@file{src/runtime/genesis}. This is used to created the header files
that that we will use to perform the actual compile in
@file{make-host-2.sh}

@node make-host-2.sh
@section @file{make-host-2.sh}
@cindex make-host-2.sh

@file {make-host-2.sh} is primarily responsible for two tasks:

@enumerate
@item Run @file{make-host-2.lisp} under lisp.
@example
(load "loader.lisp")
(load-sbcl-file "make-host-2.lisp")
@end example
@item Run @file{make-genesis-2.sh} which actually creates the executable.
@end enumerate


@node make-host-2.lisp
@section @file{make-host-2.lisp}
@cindex make-host-2.lisp


As in used in @file{make-host-1.lisp} @code{load} @file{shared.lisp}
sets @code{sb-xc:*features*} at the top level and
@file{set-up-cold-packages.lisp} and
@file{defun-load-or-cload-xcompiler.lisp} are loaded again as well.

@node set-up-cold-packages.lisp
@subsection set-up-cold-packages.lisp
@cindex set-up-cold-packages.lisp

@file{src/cold/set-up-cold-packages.lisp} is responsible for a lot of
package wizardry. It runs essentially in two modes `SBCL mode' in
which some symbols in @code{sb-cold} are connected to various other
SBCL native packages and in `CL compatability mode' where all symbols
are either inheritted from common lisp or defined in the package,
i.e. without using any implementation specific hidden system package
definitions.


The variable @code{*host-format-function-names*} help illuminate this
dynamic. The code comments has the following to say about it:

@cartouche
@quotation
The list below contains the name of every symbol whose function
might be called from a non-compiled format string. This is important
only for SBCL as host lisp built prior to git revision
6d743d78d9ba840b.  For such hosts, after giving all host packages a
new name, we must ASAP reestablish the function bindings of these
"missing" symbols.

@itemize

@item @code{print-symbol-with-prefix} was added in rev ff218a24fbd70b2e
(2007-04-29) and later exported from @code{sb-ext} with no
explanation.  It was occasionally invoked via SB-IMPL: which it no
longer is.

@item @code{sb-impl:print-type} and @code{sb-impl:print-type-specifier}
were first added in rev c1b03a36ec4439c8 (2016-01-09). Newer code
always uses them from @code{sb-impl} but older code used them from
@code{sb-ext} as well.

@end itemize

The other 3 functions mentioned below have been stable in that they
are always used from @code{sb-impl}.

This list must contain names of functions used by @emph{any} past
revision even if such function does not appear in current code.  The
list does not need additions to it for future changes
though. i.e. this is final.''

@end quotation
@end cartouche

And the following comment for @code{hide-host-packages} and
@code{unhide-host-format-funs}. When compiled by a non-SBCL CL these
are just empty stub functions:

@cartouche
@quotation
Rename all host packages, but unhide the host's format functions for
hosts that do not support renaming of internal packages.  Consider all
situations in which functions are called via ~// directives:

@itemize

@item The host calls ~/PRINT-TYPE/ for itself (i.e in its compiler) while
running make-host-1 because "our" code (being compiled) is wrong.
Barring a host bug (such as was fixed in rev e6fd2a9635e4), the format
string referencing this function would spell the name using a "dash"
package. We restore the format functions into the expected package
below.
   
@item The cross-compiler wants to call a ~// function while executing,
maybe even from a macro. The format control string should spell the
function as a "bang" package. If it didn't, the string is wrong.
   
@item The target wants to call a ~// function.
That's conceptually the easiest to deal with - we've already ensured
that cross-compiled format strings dump their symbols correctly.

@end itemize
@end quotation 
@end cartouche

In particular note that on occasion there are ``host functions that
are potentially called from format strings''. This magic is
accomplished by @code{preserving-host-function} which is a macro that
wraps the function and @code{restore-host-function} which provides the
machinery, again, for non-SBCL it is simply a no-op function.

@code{sb-cold:*shadows*} is a list of strings that indicate the
symbols that package @code{sb-cold} shadows. Most of them have to do
with numbers, types and compilation. Examples: @code{floatp},
@code{realp} @code{complexp} @code{numberp}
@code{array-dimension-limit} @code{array-rank-limit}
@code{array-total-size-limit} @code{char-code} @code{code-char}
@code{compile-file} @code{compile-file-pathname}
@code{*compile-file-pathname*}










In SBCL mode the following 







@node perfect defun-load-or-cload-xcompiler.lisp
@subsection defun-load-or-cload-xcompiler.lisp
@cindex defun-load-or-cload-xcompiler.lisp

@file{src/cold/defun-load-or-cload-xcompiler.lisp} 


@node perfect hash generator
@subsection Perfect Hash Generator
@cindex Perfect Hash Generator

@file{make-host-2.lisp} uses the Perfect Hash Generator
extensively. This is loaded using the following command defined in
@file{shared.lisp}

@example
(preload-perfect-hash-generator
 (perfect-hash-generator-journal :input))
@end example





@node perfect type.after-xc.lisp
@subsection type.after-xc.lisp
@cindex type.after-xc.lisp

@file{tests/type.after-xc.lisp} 
