

@chapter Introduction


Internal Design of CMU Common Lisp 
on the IBM RT PC



David B. McDonald
Scott E. Fahlman
Skef Wholey


CMU-CS-87-157



@strong{EEK: The purpose for temporarily adding this historical
work is to demonstrate how to coordinate the documentation of a
specific port with the hardware abstracted description of SBCL
provided in the rest of the document.}

CMU Common Lisp is an implementation of Common Lisp that currently
runs on the IBM RT PC under Mach, a Berkeley Unix 4.3 binary
compatible operating system. This document describes low level
details of the implementation. In particular, it describes the data
formats used for all Lisp objects, the assembler language routines
(miscops) used to support compiled code, the function call and return
mechanism, and other design information necessary to understand the
underlying structure of the CMU Common Lisp implementation on the IBM
RT PC under the Mach operating system.


Contract=Strategic87-90


This document is based heavily on the document @i{Revised Internal Design
of Spice Lisp} by Skef Wholey, Scott Fahlman, and Joseph Ginder.

The FASL file format was designed by Guy L. Steele Jr. and Walter van
Roggen, and the appendix on this subject is their document with very few
modifications.


@section Scope and Purpose

This document describes a new implementation of CMU Common Lisp (nee Spice
Lisp) as it is implemented on the @value(DinkyMachine) running Mach, a
Berkeley Unix 4.3 binary compatible operating system. This design is
undergoing rapid change, and for the present is not guaranteed to
accurately describe any past, present, or future implementation of CMU
Common Lisp. All questions and comments on this material should be
directed to David B. McDonald (David.McDonald@@CS.CMU.EDU).

This document specifies the hand-coded assembler routines (miscops) and
virtual memory architecture of the @value(DinkyMachine) CMU Common Lisp system.
This is a working document, and it will change frequently as the system is
developed and maintained. If some detail of the system does not agree with
what is specified here, it is to be considered a bug.

@section Notational Conventions
@cindex Bit numbering
@cindex Byte numbering
CMU Common Lisp objects are 32 bits long. The high-order bit of each word is
numbered 0; the low-order bit is numbered 31. If a word is broken into smaller
units, these are packed into the word from left to right. For example, if we
break a word into bytes, byte 0 would occupy bits 0-7, byte 1 would occupy
8-15, byte 2 would occupy 16-23, and byte 3 would occupy 24-31.

All CMU Common Lisp documentation uses decimal as the default radix; other
radices will be indicated by a subscript (as in 77@-[8]) or by a clear
statement of what radix is in use.

@chapter [Data Types and Object Formats]

@section [Lisp Objects]
@cindex [Lisp objects]

Lisp objects are 32 bits long.	They come in 32 basic types, divided into three
classes: immediate data types, pointer types, and forwarding pointer types.
The storage formats are as follows:

@cindex [Immediate object format]
@cindex [Pointer object format]

@verbatim

@b[Immediate Data Types:]
 0	       4 5						     31
------------------------------------------------------------------------
| Type Code (5) |	       Immediate Data (27)		       |
------------------------------------------------------------------------

@b[Pointer and Forwarding Types:]
 0	       4 5	        6 7			29	     31
------------------------------------------------------------------------
| Type Code (5) | Space Code (2) |    Pointer (23)	  | Unused (2) |
------------------------------------------------------------------------
@end verbatim

@section [Table of Type Codes]
@cindex [Type codes]

@verbatim

Code	Type		Class		Explanation
----	----		-----		-----------
0	+ Fixnum	Immediate	Positive fixnum, miscop code, etc.
1	GC-Forward	Pointer 	GC forward pointer, used during GC.
4	Bignum		Pointer 	Bignum.
5	Ratio		Pointer 	Two words: numerator, denominator.
6	+ Short Float	Immediate	Positive short flonum.
7	- Short Float	Immediate	Negative short flonum.
8	Single Float	Pointer 	Single precision float.
9	Double Float	Pointer 	Double precision float (?).
9	Long Float	Pointer 	Long float.
10	Complex 	Pointer 	Two words: real, imaginary parts.
11	String		Pointer 	Character string.
12	Bit-Vector	Pointer 	Vector of bits
13	Integer-Vector	Pointer 	Vector of integers
14	General-Vector	Pointer 	Vector of Lisp objects.
15	Array		Pointer 	Array header.
16	Function	Pointer 	Compiled function header.
17	Symbol		Pointer 	Symbol.
18	List		Pointer 	Cons cell.
20	C. S. Pointer	Pointer 	Pointer into control stack.
21	B. S. Pointer	Pointer 	Pointer into binding stack.
26	Interruptible	Immediate	Marks a miscop as interruptible.
27	Character	Immediate	Character object.
28	Values-Marker	Immediate	Multiple values marker.
29	Catch-All	Immediate	Catch-All object.
30	Trap		Immediate	Illegal object trap.
31	- Fixnum	Immediate	Negative fixnum.
@end verbatim

@section [Table of Space Codes]
@cindex [Space codes]

@verbatim

Code	Space		Explanation
----	-----		-----------
0	Dynamic-0	Storage normally garbage collected, space 0.
1	Dynamic-1	Storage normally garbage collected, space 1.
2	Static		Permanent objects, never moved or reclaimed.
3	Read-Only	Objects never moved, reclaimed, or altered.
@end verbatim

@section Immediate Data Type Descriptions

@table @code

@cindex Fixnum format
@item Fixnum
28-bit two's complement integer. The sign bit is stored redundantly
in the top 5 bits of the word.

@cindex [Short float format]
@item Short-Float
The sign bit is stored as part of the type code,
allowing a 28 bit signed short float format. The format of short floating
point numbers is:
@verbatim
 0	       3     4	    5           12 13		    31
---------------------------------------------------------------
| Type code (4) | Sign (1) | Exponent (8) |   Mantissa (19)   |
---------------------------------------------------------------
@end verbatim
The floating point number is the same format as the @value(DinkyMachine)
supports for single precision numbers, except it has been shifted right
by four bits for the type code. The result of any operation is therefore
truncated. Long floating point numbers are also available if you need
more accuracy and better error propagation properties.

@cindex [Character object]
@item Character
A character object holding a character code, control bits, and font
in the following format:
@verbatim
 0	       4 6	   7  8       15 16	 23 24	    31
---------------------------------------------------------------
| Type code (5) | Unused (3) | Font (8) | Bits (8) | Code (8) |
---------------------------------------------------------------
@end verbatim

@cindex [Values-Marker]
@item Values-Marker
Used to mark the presence of multiple values on the stack. The
low 16 bits indicate how many values are being returned. Note that only 65535
values can be returned from a multiple-values producing form. These are pushed
onto the stack in order, and the Values-Marker is returned in register A0.

@cindex [Catch-All object]
@item Catch-All
Object used as the catch tag for unwind-protects. Special things
happen when a catch frame with this as its tag is encountered during a throw.
See section @ref[Catch] for details.

@cindex [Trap]
@cindex [Illegal object trap]
@item Trap
Illegal object trap. This value is used in symbols to signify an
undefined value or definition.

@cindex [Interruptible Marker]
@item Interruptible-Marker
Object used to mark a miscop as interruptible. This
object is put in one of the registers and signals to the interrupt handler
that the miscop can be interrupted safely. Only miscops that can take a long
time (e.g., length when passed a circular list, system call miscops that
may wait indefinitely) are marked this way.
@end table

@section [Pointer-Type Objects and Spaces]
@cindex [Pointer object format]
@cindex [Virtual memory]

Each of the pointer-type lisp objects points into a different space in virtual
memory. There are separate spaces for Bit-Vectors, Symbols, Lists, and so on.
The 5-bit type-code provides the high-order virtual address bits for the
object, followed by the 2-bit space code, followed by the 25-bit pointer
address. This gives a 30-bit virtual address to a 32-bit word; since the
@value(DinkyMachine) is a byte-addressed machine, the two low-order
bits are 0. In effect we have carved a 30-bit space into a fixed set
of 23-bit subspaces, not all of which are used.

@cindex [Space codes]
The space code divides each of the type spaces into four sub-spaces,
as shown in the table above. At any given time, one of the dynamic
spaces is considered newspace, while the other is oldspace.
During a stop and copy garbage collection, a ``flip'' can be done, turning the
old newspace into the new oldspace. All type-spaces are flipped at once.
Allocation of new dynamic objects always occurs in newspace.

@cindex [Static space]
@cindex [Read-only space]
Optionally, the user (or system functions) may allocate objects in
static or read-only space. Such objects are never reclaimed once they
are allocated -- they occupy the space in which they were initially
allocated for the lifetime of the Lisp process. The advantage of
static allocation is that the GC never has to move these objects,
thereby saving a significant amount of work, especially if the objects
are large. Objects in read-only space are static, in that they are
never moved or reclaimed; in addition, they cannot be altered once
they are set up. Pointers in read-only space may only point to
read-only or static space, never to dynamic space. This saves even
more work, since read-only space does not need to be scavenged, and
pages of read-only material do not need to be written back onto the
disk during paging.

Objects in a particular type-space will contain either pointers to
garbage-collectible objects or words of raw non-garbage-collectible bits, but
not both. Similarly, a space will contain either fixed-length objects or
variable-length objects, but not both.	A variable-length object always
contains a 24-bit length field right-justified in the first word, with
the positive fixnum type-code in the high-order five bits. The remaining three
bits can be used for sub-type information. The length field gives the
size of the object in 32-bit words, including the header word.	The
garbage collector needs this information when the object is moved, and
it is also useful for bounds checking.

The format of objects in each space are as follows:

