\input texinfo                       @c -*- mode: texinfo; coding: utf-8 -*-
@comment %**start of header
@setfilename ../../info/eintr.info
@settitle Programming in Emacs Lisp
@include docstyle.texi
@syncodeindex vr cp
@syncodeindex fn cp
@finalout

@c ================ How to Print a Book in Various Sizes ================

@c This book can be printed in any of three different sizes.
@c Set the following @-commands appropriately.

@c     7 by 9.25 inches:
@c              @smallbook
@c              @clear largebook

@c     8.5 by 11 inches:
@c              @c smallbook
@c              @set largebook

@c     European A4 size paper:
@c              @c smallbook
@c              @afourpaper
@c              @set largebook

@c (Note: if you edit the book so as to change the length of the
@c table of contents, you may have to change the value of 'pageno' below.)

@c <<<< For hard copy printing, this file is now
@c      set for smallbook, which works for all sizes
@c      of paper, and with PostScript figures >>>>

@set smallbook
@ifset smallbook
@smallbook
@clear  largebook
@end ifset

@c ================ Included Figures ================

@c If you clear this, the figures will be printed as ASCII diagrams
@c rather than PostScript/PDF.
@c (This is not relevant to Info, since Info only handles ASCII.)
@set print-postscript-figures
@c clear print-postscript-figures

@comment %**end of header

@c per rms and peterb, use 10pt fonts for the main text, mostly to
@c save on paper cost.
@c Do this inside @tex for now, so current makeinfo does not complain.
@tex
@ifset smallbook
@fonttextsize 10

@end ifset
\global\hbadness=6666 % don't worry about not-too-underfull boxes
@end tex

@c @pagesizes 11in, 7.5in

@c For 8.5 by 11 inch format: do not use such a small amount of
@c whitespace between paragraphs as smallbook format
@ifset largebook
@tex
\global\parskip 6pt plus 1pt
@end tex
@end ifset

@c For all sized formats:  print within-book cross
@c reference with ``...''  rather than [...]

@c This works with the texinfo.tex file, version 2003-05-04.08,
@c in the Texinfo version 4.6 of the 2003 Jun 13 distribution.

@tex
\if \xrefprintnodename
 \global\def\xrefprintnodename#1{\unskip, ``#1''}
 \else
 \global\def\xrefprintnodename#1{ ``#1''}
\fi
% \global\def\xrefprintnodename#1{, ``#1''}
@end tex


@firstparagraphindent none


@c ----------------------------------------------------

@dircategory SBCL
@direntry
* Guide SBCL Cross-Compiling
@end direntry

@c When printing, define edition-number to be the printed edition
@c number, titlepage-edition-number to be the spelled out edition
@c number suitable for the title page, and update-date to be the date,
@c in the preferred style for these.  E.g., run the shell command:
@c   texi2any -D 'edition-number 3.11' \
@c            -D 'titlepage-edition-number Revised Third Edition' \
@c            -D 'update-date 31 March 2020'
@c This relates mainly to the published book sold by the FSF.

@copying
@cite{Guide SBCL Cross-Compiling}
@sp 1
@ifset edition-number
Edition @value{edition-number}, @value{update-date}
@end ifset
@sp 1
Copyright @copyright{} blah blah blah 

@sp 1

@iftex
Misc. Published by the: blah blah blah
@end iftex

@ifnottex
@end ifnottex

@sp 1
ISBN blah blah

@quotation
Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this document
under the terms of the MIT License
@end quotation
@end copying

@c half title; two lines here, so do not use 'shorttitlepage'
@tex
{\begingroup%
    \hbox{}\vskip 1.5in \chaprm \centerline{Guide SBCL Cross-Compiling}%
        \endgroup\page\hbox{}\page}
@end tex

@titlepage
@sp 6
@center @titlefont{Guide SBCL Cross-Compiling}
@sp 2
@ifset titlepage-edition-number
@center @value{titlepage-edition-number}
@end ifset
@sp 4
@center by CMU CL team, Fred, Earl Kent, many others

@page
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
@insertcopying
@end titlepage

@iftex
@headings off
@evenheading @thispage @| @| @thischapter
@oddheading @thissection @| @| @thispage
@end iftex

@ifnothtml
@c     Keep T.O.C. short by tightening up for largebook
@ifset largebook
@tex
\global\parskip 2pt plus 1pt
\global\advance\baselineskip by -1pt
@end tex
@end ifset
@end ifnothtml


@shortcontents
@contents

@ifnottex
@node Top
@top Guide SBCL Cross-Compiling


@insertcopying

This master menu first lists each chapter and index; then it lists
every node in every chapter.
@end ifnottex

@c Uncomment the 3 lines below, starting with @iftex, if you want the
@c pages of Preface to be numbered in roman numerals.  Use -9 instead
@c of -11 for smallbook format.

@c >>>> Set pageno appropriately <<<<

@c The first page of the Preface is a roman numeral; it is the first
@c right handed page after the Table of Contents; hence the following
@c setting must be for an odd negative number.

@c iftex
@c global@pageno = -11
@c end iftex

@set COUNT-WORDS count-words-example
@c Length of variable name chosen so that things still line up when expanded.


@node Preface
@unnumbered Preface

At least initially this is mostly a project plan for porting SBCL to
WASM which is an unusual port that needs indepth integration with
SBCL's cross-building capabilities, with considerable novel re-working
of the process, making it an ideal project to document the proecss and
its assumptions.


@node On Reading this Text
@unnumberedsec On Reading this Text

Some general pointers on how to use this text:

1. to understanding he SBCL compiler as an independent facility
separate from integration into an SBCL system.

2. To understand, in depth the cross-compilation process for SBCL.

3. To provide a checklist for porting SBCL to other architectures, and
operating environments

4. To get up to speed tweaking existing architectures.

5. Getting the cross compilation process running.

@node SBCL History (???)
@unnumberedsec SBCL History (???)
@cindex SBCL History

Maclisp -> Spice Lisp -> CMUCL -> SBCL


@include cmu/compiler-overview.texi

@part Compiler Front End
@include cmu/front.texi

@part Compiler Middle Phase
@include cmu/middle.texi

@part Compiler Back End
@include cmu/back.texi

@part The SBCL Lisp Virtual Machine
@include cmu/vm.texi

@part User Interface to the Compiler
@include cmu/interface.texi

@part Retargeting the Compile
@include cmu/retargeting.texi
@include cmu/debugger.texi

@c appendix stuff
@include cmu/glossary.texi

@c as a template for documenting a port.
@include cmu/rtguts.texi


@node Index
@unnumbered Index

@ignore
MENU ENTRY: NODE NAME.
@end ignore

@printindex cp

@iftex
@c Place biographical information on right-hand (verso) page

@tex
\par\vfill\supereject
\ifodd\pageno
    \global\evenheadline={\hfil} \global\evenfootline={\hfil}
    \global\oddheadline={\hfil} \global\oddfootline={\hfil}
    %\page\hbox{}\page
\else
%    \par\vfill\supereject
    \global\evenheadline={\hfil} \global\evenfootline={\hfil}
    \global\oddheadline={\hfil} \global\oddfootline={\hfil}
    %\page\hbox{}%\page
    %\page\hbox{}%\page
\fi
@end tex

@c page
@w{ }

@c ================ Biographical information ================

@w{ }
@sp 8
@center About the Author
@sp 1
@end iftex

@ifnottex
@node About the Author
@unnumbered About the Author
@end ifnottex

@quotation
Robert J. Chassell (1946--2017) started working with GNU Emacs in 1985.  He wrote
and edited, taught Emacs and Emacs Lisp, and spoke throughout the
world on software freedom.  Chassell was a founding Director and
Treasurer of the Free Software Foundation, Inc.  He was co-author of
the @cite{Texinfo} manual, and edited more than a dozen other
books.  He graduated from Cambridge University, in England.  He had an
abiding interest in social and economic history and flew his own
airplane.

@uref{https://www.fsf.org/blogs/community/goodbye-to-bob-chassell,
"Goodbye to Bob Chassell"}
@end quotation

@c @page
@c @w{ }
@c
@c @c Prevent page number on blank verso, so eject it first.
@c @tex
@c \par\vfill\supereject
@c @end tex

@c @iftex
@c @headings off
@c @evenheading @thispage @| @| @thistitle
@c @oddheading            @| @| @thispage
@c @end iftex

@bye
